This edition published 2013

Exisle Publishing Pty Ltd
‘Moonrising’, Narone Creek Road, Wollombi, NSW 2325, Australia
P.O. Box 60490, Titirangi, Auckland 0642, New Zealand
www.exislepublishing.com
First published by Hudson Street Press in 2013
Copyright © 2013 Guy Winch, PhD
All rights reserved. Except for short extracts for the purpose of review, no part of this book may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, whether electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written permission from the publisher.
A CiP catalogue record for this book is available from the National Library of Australia
ISBN 978-1-921966-35-4
Cover design by Nick Turzynski, redinc. Book Design, Auckland

Cover image by Conrad Turzynski
Printed in Shenzhen, China, by Ink Asia
This book uses paper sourced under ISO 14001 guidelines from well-managed forests and other controlled
sources.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PUBLISHER’S NOTE
While the author has made every effort to provide accurate telephone numbers and Internet addresses at the
time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes any responsibility for errors, or for
changes that occur after publication. Further, the publisher does not have any control over and does not
assume any responsibility for author or third-party Web sites or their content.

CONTENTS
TITLE
COPYRIGHT
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 1: REJECTION
CHAPTER 2: LONELINESS
CHAPTER 3: LOSS AND TRAUMA
CHAPTER 4: GUILT
CHAPTER 5: RUMINATION
CHAPTER 6: FAILURE
CHAPTER 7: LOW SELF-ESTEEM
CONCLUSION
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
NOTES
ALSO BY EXISLE PUBLISHING...
BACK COVER MATERIAL

Introduction
Ask a ten-year-old what you should do if you catch a cold and the child
would immediately recommend getting into bed and drinking chicken soup.
Ask what you should do if you get a cut on your knee and the child would
advocate cleaning it (or using antibacterial ointment) and bandaging it.
Children also know that if you break a bone in your leg you need to get a
cast on it so it mends correctly. If you then asked why these steps were
necessary they would tell you that treating such injuries helps them heal and
prevents them from getting worse, that colds can turn into pneumonia, that
cuts can become infected, and that if broken bones heal incorrectly you’ll
have trouble walking once the cast comes off. We teach our children how to
take care of their bodies from a very young age and they usually learn such
lessons well.
But ask an adult what you should do to ease the sharp pain of rejection, the
devastating ache of loneliness, or the bitter disappointment of failure and the
person would know little about how to treat these common psychological
injuries. Ask what you should do to recover from low self-esteem or loss and
trauma and adults would be equally challenged. Ask how you might deal
with intrusive ruminations or nagging guilt and you are likely to be met with
sheepish looks, feet shuffling, and a pointed effort to change the subject.
Some might confidently suggest the best remedy is to talk about our
feelings with friends or family members, certain that no mental health
professional in his or her right mind would object to talking about feelings.
But while discussing our feelings might offer relief in some situations, it can
actually be damaging in others. Pointing out these dangers usually causes
another round of sheepish looks, feet shuffling, and a pointed effort to
change the subject.
The reason we take little to no purposeful action to treat the psychological
wounds we sustain in daily life is because we lack the tools with which to
manage such experiences. True, we could seek the counsel of a mental health
professional in such situations, but doing so is often impractical, as most of
the psychological wounds we sustain in life are not serious enough to
warrant professional intervention. Just as we wouldn’t pitch a tent outside

our family doctor’s waiting room at the first sign of a cough or sniffle, we
can’t run to a therapist every time we get rejected by a romantic prospect or
whenever our boss yells at us.
But while every household has a medicine cabinet full of bandages,
ointments, and pain relievers for treating basic physical maladies, we have
no such medicine cabinet for the minor psychological injuries we sustain in
daily life. And sustain them we do, just as frequently as we do physical ones.
Each of the psychological wounds covered in this book is extremely common
and each of them is emotionally painful and potentially psychologically
damaging. Yet, until now, we’ve had no conventional means to ease the
pains, soothe the aches, and relieve the distresses of these events despite the
regularity with which they occur in our lives.
Applying emotional first aid to such injuries can prevent many of them
from affecting our mental health and emotional well-being going forward.
Indeed, many of the diagnosable psychological conditions for which we seek
professional treatment could be prevented if we applied emotional first aid to
our wounds when we first sustained them. For example, a ruminative
tendency can quickly grow into anxiety and depression, and experiences of
failure and rejection can easily lead to erosions in our self-esteem. Treating
such injuries not only accelerates their healing but also helps prevent
complications from developing and mitigates the severity of any that do
arise.
Of course, when the psychological injury is serious, emotional first aid
treatments should not replace seeing a mental health professional any more
than having a well-stocked medicine cabinet abolishes the need for
physicians and hospitals. But while we know our limitations when it comes
to our physical health, the same is not true of our mental health. Most of us
can recognize when a cut is deep enough to require stitches, we can usually
tell the difference between a swollen bruise and a broken bone, and we tend
to know when we’re dehydrated to the point of needing an infusion of
plasma. But when it comes to our psychological wounds, we lack not only
the wherewithal to do anything about them but also the ability to identify
when they require professional intervention. As a result, we often neglect our
psychological wounds until they become severe enough to impair our
functioning. We would never leave a cut on our knee unattended until it
compromised our ability to walk, but we leave psychological wounds

unattended all the time, often until they literally prevent us from moving
forward in life.
This discrepancy between our general competence in treating assaults to
our physical health and our complete incompetence where our mental health
is concerned is extremely unfortunate. If no such emotional first aid
techniques existed, if it were impossible to treat these psychological wounds,
this state of affairs might be tolerable. But such is not the case. Recent
progress in numerous areas of psychological research has unveiled many
treatment options for exactly the kinds of psychological injuries we sustain
most often.
Each chapter in this book describes a common and everyday psychological
injury and the various emotional first aid techniques we can apply to ease our
emotional pain and prevent the problem from becoming worse. These
science-based techniques can all be self-administered, much as we selfadminister first aid for our physical ailments, and they can also be introduced
to our children. The techniques in this book represent the future staples of
our psychological medicine cabinets, the mental health medical kits we can
carry with us as we go through life.
During my years studying clinical psychology in graduate school I was
frequently criticized for giving my patients specific and concrete suggestions
for how they might alleviate their emotional pains. “We’re here to do deep
psychological work,” one supervisor used to admonish me, “not to dispense
psychological aspirin—it doesn’t exist!”
But offering immediate relief and doing deep psychological work are not
mutually exclusive. I believe everyone should have access to emotional first
aid treatments, just as they should any other treatments for dressing
emotional wounds. Over the years, I’ve made it a practice to distill
innovative research findings into practical suggestions, treatments my
patients can apply to the emotional hurts of daily living. I’ve done so for one
main reason—they work. For some years now, my patients, friends, and
family members have been urging me to collect these emotional first aid
treatments into a book. I decided to do so because it’s time we took our
mental health more seriously. It’s time we practiced mental health hygiene
just as we do dental and physical hygiene. It’s time we all owned a
psychological medicine cabinet with the emotional equivalents of bandages,
antibacterial ointments, ice packs, and fever suppressants.

After all, once we know psychological aspirins do exist, we’d be foolish
not to use them.

How to Use This Book
The chapters in this book cover seven common psychological injuries we
sustain in daily life: rejection, loneliness, loss, guilt, rumination, failure, and
low self-esteem. Although they were written as stand-alone chapters I advise
reading the book in its entirety. Even if some of the chapters have no
immediate relevance, knowing the kinds of psychological injuries we might
sustain in various situations will help us recognize them when we or our
friends and family members encounter them in the future.
Each chapter in this book is divided into two sections. The first describes
the specific psychological wounds each injury inflicts—including those we
often fail to recognize. For example, we might think it obvious that
loneliness causes emotional pain, but we might not be aware that untreated
loneliness has such serious implications for our physical health that it can
shorten our life expectancy. Also less apparent is the fact that lonely people
often develop self-defeating behaviors that lead them to unconsciously push
away the very people who could alleviate their suffering.
The second section of each chapter presents the treatments readers can
apply to each of the wounds discussed in the first section. I provide general
treatment guidelines to clarify how and when each of the recommended
techniques should be administered as well as treatment summaries and
“dosage” recommendations. Because this book represents a psychological
medicine cabinet and is by no means intended to function as a substitute for
medical or psychological care by a trained professional, I end each chapter
with guidelines for when readers should consult a trained mental health
specialist.
The suggestions in this book are based on top-notch scientific studies that
have been subjected to peer review procedures and published in first-rate
academic journals. References for each of the studies and treatments can be
found in the endnotes.

CHAPTER 1
REJECTION
The Emotional Cuts and Scrapes of Daily Life
Of all the emotional wounds we suffer in life, rejection is perhaps the most
common. By the time we reach middle school we’ve already been turned
down for play dates, picked last for teams, not invited to birthday parties,
dropped by old friends who joined new cliques, and teased or bullied by
classmates. We finally get through the gauntlet of childhood rejections only
to discover that an entirely new array of rejection experiences awaits us as
adults. We get turned down by potential dates, refused by potential
employers, and snubbed by potential friends. Our spouses rebuff our sexual
advances, our neighbors give us the cold shoulder, and family members shut
us out of their lives.
Rejections are the psychological cuts and scrapes that tear our emotional
skin and penetrate our flesh. Some rejections are so severe they create deep
psychological gashes that “bleed” profusely and require urgent attention.
Others are like emotional paper cuts that sting quite a bit but bleed only a
little. One might expect that, given the frequency with which we encounter
rejection in one form or another, we’d have a clear understanding and
appreciation of its impact on our emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. But such
is not the case. We drastically underestimate the pain rejections elicit and the
psychological wounds they create.

The Psychological Wounds Rejection Inflicts
Rejections can cause four distinct psychological wounds, the severity of
which depends on the situation and our emotional health at the time.
Specifically, rejections elicit emotional pain so sharp it affects our thinking,
floods us with anger, erodes our confidence and self-esteem, and destabilizes
our fundamental feeling of belonging.
Many of the rejections we experience are comparatively mild and our
injuries heal with time. But when left untreated, even the wounds created by

mild rejections can become “infected” and cause psychological
complications that seriously impact our mental well-being. When the
rejections we experience are substantial, the urgency of treating our wounds
with emotional first aid is far greater. This not only minimizes the risk of
“infections” or complications but also accelerates our emotional healing
process. In order to administer emotional first aid and successfully treat the
four wounds rejection causes, we need a clear understanding of each of them
and a full appreciation of how our emotions, thought processes, and
behaviors are damaged when we experience rejections.

1. Emotional Pain: Why Even Stupid Rejections Smart a Lot
Imagine you’re sitting in a waiting room with two other strangers. One of
them spots a ball on the table, picks it up, and tosses it to the other. That
person then smiles, looks over, and tosses the ball to you. Let’s assume your
tossing and catching abilities are up to the task. You toss the ball back to the
first person, who quickly tosses it to the second. But then instead of tossing
the ball to you, the second person tosses it back to the first person, cutting
you out of the game. How would you feel in that situation? Would your
feelings be hurt? Would it affect your mood? What about your self-esteem?
Most of us would scoff at the idea. Two strangers didn’t pass me a stupid
ball in a waiting room, big deal! Who cares? But when psychologists
investigated this very situation, they found something quite remarkable. We
do care, far more than we realize. The ball-tossing scenario is a wellresearched psychology experiment in which the two “strangers” are actually
research confederates. The “subject” (who thinks they are all waiting to be
called for an entirely different experiment) always gets excluded after the
first or second round of ball tossing. Dozens of studies have demonstrated
that people consistently report feeling significant emotional pain as a result
of being excluded from the ball-tossing game.
What makes these findings remarkable is that compared to most of the
rejections we experience in life, being excluded by two strangers tossing a
ball is about as mild as rejection gets. If such a trivial experience can elicit
sharp emotional pain (as well as drops in mood and even self-esteem) we can
begin to appreciate how painful truly meaningful rejections often are. That is
why getting dumped by someone we’re dating, getting fired from our job, or
discovering that our friends have been meeting up without us can have such a

huge impact on our emotional well-being.
Indeed, what separates rejection from almost every other negative emotion
we encounter in life is the magnitude of the pain it elicits. We often describe
the emotional pain we experience after a significant rejection as analogous to
being punched in the stomach or stabbed in the chest. True, few of us have
actually been stabbed in the chest, but when psychologists asked people to
compare the pain of rejection to physical pains they had experienced, they
rated their emotional pain as equal in severity to that associated with natural
childbirth and cancer treatments! As a counterpoint, consider that other
emotionally painful experiences, such as intense disappointment, frustration,
or fear, while highly unpleasant, pale in comparison to rejection when it
comes to the sheer visceral pain they cause.
But why do rejections hurt so much more than other emotional wounds?
The answer lies in our evolutionary past. Humans are social animals; being
rejected from our tribe or social group in our precivilized past would have
meant losing access to food, protection, and mating partners, making it
extremely difficult to survive. Being ostracized would have been akin to
receiving a death sentence. Because the consequences of ostracism were so
extreme, our brains developed an early-warning system to alert us when we
were at risk for being “voted off the island” by triggering sharp pain
whenever we experienced even a hint of social rejection.
In fact, brain scans show that the very same brain regions get activated
when we experience rejection as when we experience physical pain.
Remarkably, the two systems are so tightly linked that when scientists gave
people acetaminophen (Tylenol) before putting them through the dastardly
ball-tossing rejection experiment, they reported significantly less emotional
pain than people who were not given a pain reliever. Sadly, other negative
emotions like embarrassment do not share these characteristics, rendering
Tylenol ineffective when we get the date wrong for our office Halloween
party and show up to work dressed like Marge Simpson.

Rejection Rejects Reason
Martha and Angelo came to couples therapy to deal with frequent arguments
about Angelo’s inability to seek new employment after he had been
downsized by his company six months earlier. “I’d been with that shipping

company twenty years,” Angelo explained. The hurt was still apparent on his
face. “Those people were my friends! How could they do this to me?”
While Martha had been sympathetic initially, she was becoming
increasingly frustrated about Angelo’s inability to recover from the
emotional blow and start looking for a new job. It quickly became apparent
that Angelo was as frustrated with himself as Martha was. He tried to
motivate himself and talk himself into making efforts, but he simply felt too
consumed by emotional pain. He tried reasoning with himself to let go of the
hurt and “get over it,” but nothing worked.
Many of us find it difficult to talk ourselves out of the hurt we feel when
we experience rejection. One of the reasons rejection is often so devastating
is that our reason, logic, and common sense are usually ineffective when it
comes to mitigating the pain we feel. For example, when scientists told
participants who had been excluded in a computerized version of the balltossing experiment (called Cyberball) that their exclusion had been rigged,
finding out the rejection wasn’t even “real” did little to ease the pain they
felt. Scientists are a tenacious bunch, so they told a different set of
participants that the people who’d excluded them were members of the Ku
Klux Klan. Surely rejection would hurt less if we despised the people who
rejected us. But nope, it still hurt just as much. They even tried replacing the
cyber ball with an animated cyber bomb that was programmed to explode at
random, “killing” whoever had possession of it at the time. But subjects felt
just as much rejection pain when they were not passed a cyberbomb as they
were when they were not passed a cyberball.
Rejections impact our ability to use sound logic and think clearly in other
ways as well. For example, merely being asked to recall episodes of acute
rejection was sufficient for people to score substantially lower on subsequent
IQ tests, tests of short-term memory, and measures of reasoning ability and
decision making.
Romantic rejections are especially potent when it comes to scrambling our
brains and tampering with our good judgment, even when they occur
extremely early in a relationship or, indeed, before a “relationship” even
exists (breakups after long or serious relationships are covered in chapter 3).
One young man I worked with flew to Europe to “surprise” a woman he had
met on a week-long summer vacation despite her clearly telling him she was
not interested in pursuing a relationship. Still smarting from that rejection,

the young man convinced himself that his impromptu “romantic gesture”
would “melt her heart and change her mind for sure!” The woman was so
startled when he showed up at her front door at an indecent hour of the
morning the only thing she changed was the locks. The desperation we feel
in the wake of certain rejections can drive many of us to confuse a romantic
gesture with a creepy one.

2. Anger and Aggression: Why Doors Get Broken and Walls Get
Punched
Rejections often trigger anger and aggressive impulses that cause us to feel a
powerful urge to lash out, especially at those who rejected us, but in a pinch,
innocent bystanders will do. One group of innocent bystanders that know this
all too well are the countless doors and walls that have had fists punched
through them by freshly rejected men, and at times women (although those
made of brick and solid wood usually get the last laugh). Keeping such
dangers in mind is equally important when we’re the ones doing the
rejecting. Even if the person we plan to reject is a model of kindheartedness,
our Hummel figurine collection might still be in grave danger.
Lest we judge the wall punchers and figurine breakers too harshly, we
should consider that even the most inconsequential rejections stir up highly
aggressive tendencies in the best of us. For example, after a game of
Cyberball, people were given the option to blast an innocent participant with
unpleasant white noise (someone they were explicitly told had not been part
of the ball-tossing situation). Rejected subjects blasted innocent participants
with much louder and much lengthier durations of noise than nonrejected
subjects did. In different series of studies, rejected subjects forced innocent
participants to eat four times as much hot sauce as nonrejected subjects did,
to consume terrible-tasting beverages, and to listen to extremely aversive
audiotapes. In case you’re wondering how often the scientists behind such
experiments get recruited by reality TV executives to devise disgusting
challenges for their game show contestants, your guess is as good as mine.
Unfortunately, our tendency to respond to rejection with anger has far
darker and more serious manifestations as well. Severe and repeated
experiences of rejection can elicit the kind of aggression that goes far beyond
the realm of white noise or hot sauce. When psychological wounds of this
nature are left untreated they quickly become “infected” and threaten serious

damage to a person’s mental health. Stories of injurious and self-injurious
aggressive behaviors following rejections are frequently in the news. Jilted
lovers who seek revenge, fired postal workers who ... “go postal,” and the
terrible epidemic of bullied children who take their own lives are just a few
such examples of what happens when the psychological wounds caused by
chronic and severe rejections remain untreated.
In 2001 the office of the surgeon general of the United States issued a
report that found social rejection to be a greater risk factor for adolescent
violence than gang membership, poverty, or drug use. Feelings of rejection
also play a huge role in violence between romantic partners. Many incidents
of violence are triggered by jealousy and suspicions of infidelity, which are
tightly related to feelings of rejection. When scientists examined 551 cases in
which men killed their wives, they found that almost half occurred in
response to real or imminent separations. Indeed, men who murder their
wives often later admit to being unable to deal with the rejection they felt.
Studies of school shootings, including the 1999 Columbine tragedy, found
that thirteen of fifteen incidents involved perpetrators who had experienced
significant interpersonal rejection and ostracism from schoolmates. In many
cases, shooters specifically targeted students who had bullied, teased, or
rejected them in the past, often seeking them out first.
We all experience rejection to some degree and thankfully only a tiny
minority of us end up in the headlines as a result. However, the link between
rejection and aggression is strong, and it is extremely important to recognize
that the pain rejections cause can spur some of us to behave in ways we
never would otherwise.

3. Damaged Self-Esteem: Kicking Ourselves When We’re Already
Down
Experiencing profound or repeated rejection is extremely harmful to our selfesteem. In fact, the mere act of recalling a previous rejection is sufficient to
cause a temporary drop in feelings of self-worth. Unfortunately, the
pounding our self-esteem takes rarely stops there. We often compound our
rejection experiences by becoming extremely self-critical—essentially
kicking ourselves when we’re already down. Responding this way is
common but it can easily cause the psychological cuts and scrapes of the

original rejection to become “infected” and consequently to have a truly
debilitating effect on our mental health.
Angelo lost his job at the shipping company because his entire department
got eliminated in a cost-cutting measure, yet he perceived the rejection as
highly personal (“Those people were my friends! How could they do this to
me?”). Personalizing the rejection made Angelo feel as though he was
unwanted by his friends and abandoned by his long-time colleagues. He
avoided contact with anyone from his former company, as he was convinced
that communicating with them would only expose him to the disapproval,
disappointment, or disrespect they felt toward him, despite such fears being
utterly unfounded. When friends and coworkers did reach out to him (which
of course they did), he avoided responding to their e-mails and voice
messages even when they contained leads for other jobs. After several
months, his friends stopped reaching out entirely. In Angelo’s mind, their
eventual silence only justified his fear that they’d never cared for him in the
first place.
Angelo is not alone. We all have a tendency to take rejections too
personally and to draw conclusions about our shortcomings when there is
little evidence that such assumptions are warranted. Think back (even if way
back) to when you were rejected by someone romantically. Did you find
yourself listing everything that might be wrong with you? Did you fault
yourself for not being attractive enough or sophisticated enough or smart
enough or rich enough or young enough, or all of the above? Did you think,
“This always happens to me!” or “No one will ever love me!” or “I’m never
going to find someone!” Personal rejections are rarely as personal as we
experience them to be, and even when they are, they rarely involve such a
sweeping indictment of our flaws.
In addition to unnecessarily personalizing rejection, we also tend to
overgeneralize it even when we have no grounds to do so (for example, by
thinking, “This always happens to me” or “I’m never going to find
someone”) or to engage in needless self-criticism by assuming we could have
prevented the rejection had we done something differently. Self-criticism is
especially problematic following romantic rejections, as many of us spend
hours analyzing everything we said or did in a desperate search for our
elusive “critical wrong move” (e.g., “Why did I wait so long before calling
her?” “I should never have had that last drink!” or “Maybe it was too soon to

show her my Elmer Fudd underwear collection”).
In reality, critical wrong moves are exceedingly rare (although, granted,
there’s probably never a right time to show a woman one’s Elmer Fudd
underwear collection). The most frequent reasons we get turned down as
romantic prospects (or as job applicants) are because of a lack of general
chemistry, because we don’t match the person’s or company’s specific needs
at that time, or because we don’t fit the narrow definition of who they’re
looking for—not because of any critical missteps we might have made nor
because we have any fatal character flaws.
These errors in thinking serve little useful purpose and they only deepen
the pain we already feel by adding unnecessary and highly inaccurate selfrecriminations that further damage our already battered self-esteem.
Rejections hurt enough—we certainly don’t need to add salt to our own
wounds or kick ourselves once we’re already down.

4. Threatening Our Need to Belong: People Who Need People Are
Not the Luckiest People
One of the reasons our self-esteem is so vulnerable to rejection is that we are
wired with a fundamental need to feel accepted by others. When our need to
belong remains unsatisfied for extended periods of time, either because of
the rejections we’ve experienced or because we lack opportunities to create
supportive relationships, it can have a powerful and detrimental effect on our
physical and psychological health.
Some of us have such challenging life circumstances that satisfying our
need to belong can present a real challenge. David, a young man I worked
with some years ago, faced far greater hurdles than most in this regard. His
story taught me that once we’ve suffered profound and repeated rejection
over our lifetimes, finding our place in the world and feeling as though we
belong can be the hardest struggle of all.
David was born with a rare genetic illness that typically affects multiple
bodily systems and causes a significantly shortened life span (at the time,
most children born with the illness died before reaching the age of twenty).
Although David had a relatively mild form of the disorder, he still required
numerous surgeries and hospitalizations throughout his childhood. David’s
illness affected not just his health but his appearance as well.

Musculoskeletal problems made his gait unsteady and he had noticeable
irregular facial characteristics, such as a flattened upper lip, a prominent
lower jaw, and significant dental trauma. Further, problems regulating saliva
meant he was prone to drooling.
Children born with more severe forms of David’s illness often have
significant physical disabilities and life-threatening medical problems that
prevent them from attending regular schools. David’s milder condition (and
the fact that intelligence is not affected) meant he was one of the few
children with the disorder who was able to attend a local elementary and
high school. But for David, this “blessing” came at a terrible price. His
appearance, his lack of coordination, and his tendency to drool when he
concentrated led him to experience cruel and daily rejections from his peers
throughout his school years.
David was never invited to parties, he had virtually no friends, and he
spent every lunch hour and recess sitting alone. His lack of coordination and
muscle weakness prevented him from participating in after-school or
extracurricular sport activities with the other neighborhood boys. His few
attempts to explore after-school activities for children with disabilities ended
poorly because his comparative “health” made him stand out (at times,
literally) and rendered him a poor fit for such programs as well. As a result,
David’s basic need to belong remained entirely unmet throughout his
childhood and teen years and the regular (and often harsh) rejections he
suffered caused him tremendous emotional pain.
I met David soon after he graduated from high school and a few months
before he was to start classes at a local community college. Although David
was excited to attend college he was terrified at the prospect of facing a
novel round of painful rejections from a new cadre of peers. His wellmeaning parents assured David that college students were more “mature” and
more accepting than high school kids were and that he would have a far
easier time “fitting in” than he did in high school. But a lifetime of rejection
had devastated David’s self-esteem and he feared otherwise. “They’re going
to take one look at me and turn away,” he said in our first session. “And
those will be the nice ones. The mean ones will turn away and laugh behind
my back.”
I agreed with David that first impressions might be problematic for him (I
saw no point in denying what a lifetime of experience had already

demonstrated), so I asked him whether he had a plan to correct those first
impressions when opportunities arose to do so. We started discussing how he
might handle potential social interactions and it quickly became clear that
David’s social skills were severely underdeveloped. Years of alienation and a
dearth of social experiences meant David often struggled to come up with the
right thing to say or do in common situations, something he readily
acknowledged.
We decided to spend the summer working on his social skills. We
identified potential social situations and role-played how he might handle
them. David was also willing to accept that any initial harsh or rejecting
reactions he received from college classmates would likely not be strictly
personal, but rather a result of their unfamiliarity with his medical problems
and their own feelings of discomfort around people with disabilities.
Consequently, we decided to brainstorm possible ways for him to relieve any
awkwardness or tension his unsteady gait and his drooling might evoke in his
classmates (for example, by joking about them when it was appropriate to do
so). By the time September rolled around, David felt ready to begin his
college career. He was still apprehensive about the prospect of being
rejected, but he also felt as though he had much better tools with which he
could approach social situations. We scheduled his next session for after his
first week of classes.
The anguish on David’s face was evident from the second he walked into
my office. He dropped onto the couch and sighed deeply. “I arrived early for
my first class and sat in the front row,” he said. “No one else sat there. So
when I arrived early for my second class I sat in a middle row. The row in
front of me filled up, as did the row behind me, but no one sat in my row. I
arrived early to my third class as well but this time I waited until class was
about to begin and went and sat between two people. I said hello. They
nodded. One of them moved two seats away from me a few minutes into the
class. The other never glanced at me again and bolted as soon as the class
was over. As for everyone else, it was the same story. People stared if they
thought I couldn’t see them or they looked away. No one talked to me. No
one made eye contact, not even the professors.”
I was extremely disappointed to hear David’s news. After dealing with so
much physical and emotional hardship and after suffering such extreme
social rejection, I truly wanted for him to have a positive experience. My

hopes had not been unreasonably high, as I believed that even a small taste
of social acceptance would have done so much for his self-esteem and his
quality of life. We had spent months working on how David might correct
any negative first impressions he evoked, but if his classmates continued to
avoid him, if no one would sit next to him or meet his eye, if no one was
willing to talk with him, it would be extremely difficult for him to do so.
David’s morale was at a low point and I was afraid he might slip into
despair. The psychological wounds inflicted by lifelong rejection ran deep
and David had already been exposed to more emotional pain than most
people experience in their lifetime. I was determined to help David turn
things around. Disappointing as his first week had been, I believed it was too
soon for him to lose hope. But if he was to have any chance of succeeding,
he would first need to treat the fresh wounds inflicted by the rejections he
had just suffered.

How to Treat the Psychological Wounds Rejection
Inflicts
Many of the rejections we face are significant (like Angelo’s), reoccurring
(like school or workplace bullying), or both (like David’s repeated rejections
by his peers and classmates). In such situations, the risk of leaving our
emotional wounds unattended can be profound. But not all rejections require
emotional first aid. For example, the “survivors” of the ball-tossing
experiments would probably have recovered fully from their experiences
even if they hadn’t been thoroughly debriefed about the real purpose of the
studies (which they all were). Let’s open our psychological medicine cabinet
and review our treatment options.

General Treatment Guidelines
Rejections can inflict four distinct emotional wounds, each of which might
require some form of emotional first aid: lingering visceral pain, anger and
aggressive urges, harm to our self-esteem, and damage to our feeling that we
belong. As with any kind of wound, it is best to treat the emotional wounds
of rejection as soon as possible to avoid the risk of “infection” and
psychological complications. Remember, these are first aid treatments only

and might be inappropriate or insufficient for more profound rejection
experiences or ones that have a substantial impact on our mental health. At
the end of the chapter I present guidelines for when one should consult a
mental health professional.
Some of the treatments that follow are effective for soothing more than
one type of wound while others are more specialized. The treatments are
listed in the order in which they should be administered. Treatments A
(managing self-criticism) and B (reviving self-worth) primarily target
emotional pain and damaged self-esteem, while Treatment C (replenishing
social connections) targets threatened feelings of belonging. Each of these
three treatments is also beneficial for reducing anger and aggressive
impulses. Treatment D (lowering sensitivity) is optional as it can have
uncomfortable emotional side effects.

Treatment A: Argue with Self-Criticism
Although it is important to question our part in a rejection so we might
rectify any obvious mistakes we made and avoid such experiences in the
future, doing so requires a delicate touch. Too often our quest to understand
“what went wrong” leads to overpersonalizing or overgeneralizing the
rejection or becoming too self-critical in its wake. Needlessly finding all
kinds of faults in our character, our physical appearance, or our behavior will
only deepen the pain we feel in the moment, provoke further emotional
bleeding, and significantly delay our healing. Therefore, it is far more useful
to err on the side of self-kindness when evaluating our role in a rejection
experience than it is to criticize ourselves for any mistakes or shortcomings.
Nonetheless, the urge to be self-critical in such situations can be extremely
powerful. In order to avoid kicking ourselves when we’re down, we have to
be able to “argue” with our self-critical voice and adopt a kinder perspective.
To win this internal debate we need talking points, arguments we can use to
formulate a more balanced understanding of why the rejection occurred.

EXERCISE FOR ARGUING WITH SELF-CRITICISM
1. List (in writing) any negative or self-critical thoughts you have about the
rejection.

2. Use the following self-criticism “counterarguments” from a variety of
rejection scenarios to formulate personalized rebuttals to each of the selfcriticisms you listed. Feel free to list more than one counterargument per
self-critical thought when it is relevant to do so.
3. Whenever you have a self-critical thought, make sure to immediately
articulate the relevant counterargument(s) fully and clearly in your mind.

Counterarguments for Romantic Rejections
After twenty years as a psychologist in private practice, I’ve heard countless
tales of romantic rejection both from those doing the rejecting and those
getting the heave-ho. People reject romantic partners and prospects for many
different reasons, most of which have nothing to do with anyone’s
shortcomings. Most often it is a simple matter of chemistry—either there is a
spark or there isn’t. Rather than reaching unnecessary and inaccurate
conclusions about your faults, consider these alternative explanations:
Perhaps the person prefers a specific type that you do not fit (e.g., she’s into
blonds and you have brown hair or she has a thing for guys with shaved
heads and you have an unruly mop). It’s also possible the person’s ex
reentered the picture, or she might be going through a crisis at home or in her
personal life. Or you might simply be a poor lifestyle match (e.g., she’s a
creature-comfort homebody and you love camping and urinating in the
woods).
It’s also possible you’re “too good” for the person in some way. You take a
hard line on vices and unbeknownst to you he parties so hard he has regular
blackouts, or your professional success might shine a spotlight on his
floundering career, or you’re a police officer and his best friend is the
neighborhood pot dealer, or you’re a talented pastry chef and he’s struggling
with weight loss and a weakness for Bavarian strudel. The person might have
commitment issues and tend to run the moment he feels another person
getting too close, he might have self-esteem issues and worry that if you’re
that interested in him there must be something wrong with you, or he might
not be an especially nice, kind, or sensitive person to begin with.
Timing can be a crucial issue as well. You might be looking to settle down
and the other person is not, or vice versa, one of you likes to proceed slowly
and the other prefers intense courtships and more “instant” relationships, or
you’re just out of a long-term partnership and the person you’re interested in

had a bad experience with being someone’s rebound romance.
In each of the above situations the person getting rejected did nothing
wrong and the rejection had nothing to do with any inadequacies on his or
her part. The bottom line is, if people give you the “It’s not you, it’s me”
speech—believe them! And when they don’t, assume it’s them anyway. The
rejection will still hurt, but much less so than if you insist on spreading the
salt of self-blame on an already painful wound.

Counterarguments for Workplace Rejections
Similarly to dating, getting rejected by prospective employers has usually
much less to do with any mistakes or inadequacies you displayed and more
to do with your fit with the company or the job description. Some jobs
listings are required to be publicized but were always meant to be filled
internally, other times employers are looking for a specific skill set or
background, and yet others might be required to come up with several
candidates even though they already know who they plan to hire. I’ve heard
some employers confess to rejecting candidates solely because they’ve had
bad experiences with other graduates of their academic institutions, their
former companies, or their home states.
One aspect receiving increased attention from scientists is the impact of
being rejected in the workplace by members of our workgroup, our superiors,
or both (e.g., you’re never informed of group lunches or after-work gettogethers, you don’t get e-mails about certain meetings, or you repeatedly get
criticized and singled out by your colleagues and/or your boss). In most
situations, the rejection or exclusion is motivated by dynamics related to the
organization and its culture, not to your character or job performance. For
example, whistle-blowers are frequently given the silent treatment and
shunned by their fellow employees (shunning is an extremely painful form of
social rejection) even when the whistle-blower’s actions were beneficial to
them.
One young man I worked with was extremely outspoken about how poor
the work conditions and compensation were in his company (which they
were) and he quickly became the target of mistreatment by his supervisor as
a result. Even though his colleagues cheered his efforts at first, the culture of
bullying in the company soon led them to treat him just as poorly in hopes

that doing so would curry favor with their supervisor. Fortunately he was
able to recognize that the rejections he suffered at work were not a reflection
on his performance (he was an outstanding employee) or his character.
Indeed, his initiative and courage were admirable.
When we encounter rejection in the workplace we should consider the
extent to which it is motivated by conforming to a negative or bullying
corporate culture, acting out of ambition and rivalry, or making efforts to
appeal to higher-ups and superiors. Doing so will help us avoid unfounded
assumptions about our abilities or character and prevent us from making the
experience even more painful and damaging than it already is.

Counterarguments for Social Rejections
Our friendships and social circles usually nourish our belonging needs but
they can also be the source of extremely painful rejections. One of the
situations I hear about most is when individuals discover their friends have
been meeting up without them. Although it might seem impossible not to
take such exclusions personally, these things often happen for entirely other
reasons. For example, an established group of friends might have an
unspoken requirement of exclusivity of the kind you are not willing to give.
Sure, you hang out with them but you also want to be able to hang out with
other groups and they do not (a trend that is extremely common in middle
school and high school but also occurs among adults).
The same situation might be true of individual friends. Someone might be
looking for a best friend scenario that requires the kind of time and
emotional commitment you are unable or unwilling to give (because of
family, work, or other constraints or because it would take away from other
friendships you value). This friend then intensifies his relationship with a
different friend who is willing to give him the time and attention you were
not, and your friendship with each of them gets marginalized as a result.
Hurtful as it is to discover two of your friends are now spending more time
with one another than they are with you, it is usually not your fault, nor in
essence is it theirs. Certainly it says nothing about your desirability as a
friend.
In other instances, you might find yourself being excluded from a group
that shares a passion you feel less fanatical about than they do. Some social

groups love to get together and discuss the same issues over and over again,
whether sports, politics, parenting, or celebrities. In one case, a mother of a
toddler was “dropped” by her “mommy group” because she had made
repeated efforts to expand the topics of conversation beyond diaper
changing, breastfeeding, and developmental milestones. Doing so threatened
the integrity of the group and so she was slowly marginalized. Once she
understood why this occurred she was actually relieved. She told me, “If I
had to listen to one more story about cleaning vomit out of car seats I would
have screamed.”
Sometimes our social groups recognize we’ve outgrown them even before
we do.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: ARGUE WITH SELF-CRITICISM
Dosage: Administer whenever you experience a rejection and repeat as
necessary whenever you have self-critical thoughts related to the rejection
experience.

Effective for: Soothing hurt feelings and emotional pain and minimizing
damage to self-esteem.

Secondary benefits: Reduces anger and aggressive impulses.

Treatment B: Revive Your Self-Worth
One of the best ways to mitigate the hurt rejection causes and replenish our
confidence and self-worth is to remind ourselves of important aspects of our
character that others find valuable and desirable (even if those who rejected
us did not). As an example, one attractive young woman I worked with dealt
with any rejections from men by examining herself in a full-length mirror
and saying aloud to her reflection, “Nope, it’s not you. You look great!”
A similar albeit more complex process of self-validation played a critical
role for David, the young man with a rare genetic illness, when it came to his
recovery from the rejections he experienced during his first week in college.
David’s classmates seemed to reject him outright, much as his high school

peers had, and David’s self-esteem suffered accordingly. I knew that unless
David’s sense of self-worth recovered, even a little, he would lack the
strength to make any efforts to connect with his classmates and correct their
first impressions of him. Fortunately, there was one area in which David
excelled and although it had nothing to do with academia, I was certain it
could bridge the gulf that separated him from his fellow students.
David had the habit of arriving early both to his appointments with me and
to his classes. Armed with several local newspapers, he would then proceed
to scour each of their sports sections, reading every word and examining
every statistic. He also spent hours listening to sports radio. As a result,
David was extremely knowledgeable about sports, none more so than
baseball. David was a huge Yankees fan and discussing them always caused a
huge shift in his demeanor. He would sit up straighter, state his opinions
fluidly and with confidence, and come across as enthusiastic, smart, and
insightful about his team, the league, and the sport at large.
After his second week of college, David observed that he was not the only
person who tended to arrive early to class. Several male classmates also
came early and they too read the sports sections while waiting for class to
begin. Given their attire and paraphernalia, David concluded that most of
them were Yankees fans as well. I suggested that David choose one of them
and start a conversation about the Yankees. David’s first reaction was to
refuse. He was convinced any such move on his part would be rebuffed or
ignored. But a few days later the Yankees secured their place in the playoffs
and David discussed the team’s prospects in our session. His analysis was
impressive.
“I feel like taking notes,” I joked, “so I could pass off some of your
opinions as my own.”
“Feel free,” he said. “Trust me! That’s exactly what’s going to happen in
the playoffs.”
“You’re that certain?”
“No one knows the Yankees like me!” he said proudly.
“Not even those other guys who come to class early?” I challenged him.
“No way!” David insisted.
“That would make for an interesting discussion then,” I pointed out. David
didn’t answer. His fear of rejection was still too strong to allow him to

commit to a course of action. But after the Yankees won their first playoff
game, his excitement got the better of him and he found himself throwing out
a comment to a classmate about the team’s prospects of winning the World
Series. Much to his surprise, the young man responded by agreeing heartily
and raising his hand for a high-five. David was stunned. He offered another
comment and was soon shocked to find himself in the midst of a three-way
discussion with two of his classmates.
This one preclass interaction had a huge impact on David’s feelings of
self-worth and he agreed to instigate further discussions about the Yankees.
He was thrilled to discover that his classmates were just as eager to discuss
their team’s success as David was. The more David spoke up, the more
interest his classmates took in his opinions. Their preclass discussions soon
became a ritual. David and several other classmates gathered before each
class to dissect the Yankees’ latest game and discuss the team’s prospects for
winning the World Series.
The impact these unofficial gatherings had on David’s demeanor and mood
was profound. For the first time in his life, he felt respected by his peers. The
more the Yankees succeeded, the more eager David was to get to class and
discuss the games with his classmates. And the more he exhibited his
knowledge and insights, the more acceptance and validation he received
from them.
A key moment occurred when during one of their discussions, David was
so focused on what he was saying he forgot to swallow and drool dripped
down his chin. Despite a moment of panic, David was able to keep his
composure well enough to use one of the lines we had come up with to
address exactly such a situation. He wiped his chin and said, “You’re not a
real Yankees fan unless their success makes you drool.” His classmates
laughed and continued their discussion as though nothing had happened.
David’s ability to avert a potentially awkward moment served to fuel his
confidence even further.
Fortunately, the Yankees had a great postseason that year and they
provided ample opportunity for David and his classmates to get to know each
other. His proudest moment came when he arrived later than usual and just in
time to hear one student ask another, “Where’s David, the Yankees guy?” He
walked in a second later and was received with warm hellos.
“I’ve overheard people talking about me all my life,” David confessed in

our next session. “I was always the weirdo, the retard, the spaz.” He paused,
a big smile breaking onto his face. “Now I’m David, the Yankees guy!”
David beamed with pride. “It feels like I finally found a way in, like I’m one
of them. They look at me and see me as a real person. I can’t tell you how
good that feels!”
Connecting to a sense of self-worth played a vital role in David’s recovery
from the wounds inflicted by the rejections he suffered. Although he still had
a long path of emotional healing ahead of him, David’s first semester at
college allowed him to experience social acceptance, and for the first time in
his life, he felt like he belonged.

EXERCISE FOR REVIVING YOUR SELF-WORTH
The following exercise will help you get in touch with meaningful aspects of
your character and revitalize feelings of self-worth.
1. Make a written list of five characteristics, attributes, or traits you value
highly that you possess within yourself. Try to keep your list relevant to the
domain in which the rejection occurred. It is important to take the time to
think about qualities that really matter to you (for example, if you’ve been
rejected by a romantic partner and you know the following qualities to be
true you might list items such as caring, loyal, good listener, considerate,
and emotionally available).
2. Rank your list of characteristics according to their order of importance to
you.
3. Choose two of the top three attributes you listed and write a short essay
(one or two paragraphs) about each one, covering the following points:
• Why the specific quality is important to you
• How this attribute influences your life
• Why this attribute is an important part of your self-image

TREATMENT SUMMARY: REVIVE YOUR SELF-WORTH
Dosage: Administer whenever you experience a rejection and repeat as
necessary.

Effective for: Soothing hurt feelings and emotional pain and rebuilding
damaged self-esteem.

Treatment C: Replenish Feelings of Social Connection
Although the sting of rejection can make us hesitant to engage others, we
should make efforts to overcome these fears and turn to our social networks
for support or find other ways to refuel our feelings of social connection.
Social support mitigates stress of all kinds but it is especially valuable in the
wake of rejection. It creates an immediate reminder of our significant
relationships, which in turn can help restore depleted feelings of belonging.
In one study, even a brief exchange with a friendly experimenter was
sufficient to reduce subjects’ aggression following a social rejection. In
another, instant messaging online with an unfamiliar peer after a rejection
restored adolescents’ and young adults’ self-esteem.
Getting social support from our close friends and confidants following a
rejection can sometimes be challenging because they are likely to
underestimate the pain the rejection in question caused us. Estimating
visceral and physical pain, whether our own or that of others, is something
we’re all bad at (unless we happen to be experiencing the same kind of pain
in the moment). For example, the majority of women who plan to forgo pain
medication during childbirth reverse their decision once they go into labor.
Family members, friends, and teachers of bullied students who’ve resorted
to desperate measures (such as suicide) are often stunned because they had
not appreciated the magnitude of the distress the person was feeling. A recent
and compelling study found that teachers who were first put through the balltossing exclusion experiment had a far greater appreciation for the emotional
pain a bullied student felt than teachers who were not made to feel rejected.
They also recommended the bully get a more severe punishment as a result.
Social support can be even more crucial when the rejection we experience
involves discrimination. Much as we would like to believe we are an
enlightened society, our track record when it comes to accepting those who
are different from ourselves argues otherwise. Race, nationality, sexual
orientation, religious beliefs, disability, gender, and age are all factors that
cause millions of people to face extremely painful rejections by their friends,
family, employers, neighbors, and strangers. Seeking support from members
of our group after being the target of discrimination has been shown to

reduce feelings of anger and depression, strengthen our group identity, and
counterbalance the harmful effects of being devalued by a dominant culture.

Find New Affiliations with a Better Fit
Our need to belong has some substitutability, meaning that new relationships
and memberships can psychologically replace those that have ended,
especially if they provide a better fit for our personality and interests. Painful
as rejections are, we can always view them as opportunities to evaluate
whether the romantic partner, social circle, friend, or employer in question
was a good fit for our personalities, interests, lifestyles, or careers.
Our choice of social group is often motivated by circumstance. We get
close to randomly assigned college roommates, colleagues we meet at work,
or the parents of our children’s playmates. While many such friendships
succeed, others dissolve when we or they outgrow them. This is especially
common when the circumstances that brought us together change: when we
graduate from college, move to new jobs, or our children stop playing with
theirs. Despite the initial sting of rejection we feel, we might later realize
we’re far less upset about losing the relationship or friendship than we
initially thought.
Sometimes merely spending time with a group with whom we feel a strong
connection can help replenish feelings of social connectedness even if few
words are spoken (such as shooting hoops with our buddies or seeing a show
or a movie with friends). When seeking one-on-one social support we should
be thoughtful about our choices, especially if we’re still hurting from the
wounds of a fresh rejection. Dear friends might care for us deeply, but if they
are limited in their capacity to express empathy and support they might not
be our best choice.
Anyone who has suffered a serious illness or physical injury or struggled
with a disability (like David) has probably experienced people feeling
uncomfortable and looking away, avoiding contact, “forgetting” to call or
visit, and even losing touch entirely. Cancer patients and those with other
illnesses often join support groups to help manage the stress of the illness
and their treatments while gaining support from others who’ve faced similar
struggles and rejections.

Have a “Social Snack”
Although it is best to connect with those who can provide social support and
feelings of connection it might not always be possible for us to do so. In the
film Cast Away, Chuck Noland (Tom Hanks) is stranded alone on an island
for four years, during which he copes with social starvation by looking at a
photograph of his girlfriend, Kelly, and by talking aloud to a volleyball he
names “Wilson” and who becomes his much-beloved companion. Much like
having a snack eases our hunger when we don’t have the opportunity to eat a
full meal, “snacking” on reminders of our significant emotional connections
eases our “social hunger” when we feel rejected, excluded, or alone.
Social snacking can take many forms, but scientists have found that
photographs of loved ones are one of the most emotionally nutritious snacks
we can consume after being rejected. In one study, subjects placed
photographs on their desks of either loved ones or celebrities and were asked
to vividly relive a significant rejection experience from their own past.
Subjects with pictures of celebrities on their desks suffered a large drop in
mood as a result of recalling the rejection while those with pictures of loved
ones registered almost no change in mood at all. Such findings imply that
teens and tweens entering the gauntlet of middle school might be well
advised to replace posters of musicians and actors with glossy eight-by-tens
of Grandpa Dwight and beloved Aunt Flossie.
Photographs are not the only social snacks with nutritional value. Other
experiments found that merely recalling positive relationships or warm
interactions we’ve had with our nearest and dearest was sufficient to reduce
the amount of aggression people felt after being rejected. Reading
meaningful e-mails or letters, watching videos of loved ones, or using valued
mementos of those to whom we feel most connected also have nutritional
value as social snacks. Mementos and inanimate objects can also have
significant “caloric value,” especially when a rejection is compounded by
general loneliness, as was the case for Chuck Noland with “Wilson.” The
next time we ask someone on a date or apply for a new job we might want to
have pictures of our friends and loved ones available in our pocket just in
case, or, if we must, a volleyball.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: REPLENISH FEELINGS OF SOCIAL

CONNECTION
Dosage: Make sure to administer whenever you experience a rejection.
Since there are numerous ways in which you might be able to replenish
feelings of social connection, you may wish to apply several forms of this
treatment as necessary (e.g., spending an afternoon with family members
who appreciate and love you and social snacking on pictures of them later
on).

Effective for: Replenishing your need to belong and reducing anger and
aggressive urges.

Secondary benefits: Soothing hurt feelings and emotional pain and
rebuilding damaged self-esteem.

Treatment D: Desensitize Yourself
Anyone who has ever made cold calls (for example, to prospective
employers or to ask people to donate to a charity) knows how difficult it is to
make the first few calls. It’s extremely unpleasant to hear “No, thanks” and
have the phone slammed in your ear. But something interesting happens
around the fifth or sixth call—we begin to take “no” much less personally.
We shrug it off, strike a line through the entry, and move on to the next
person on our list. Actors, musicians, and performers have the same
experience. If an actor rarely auditions, getting rejected is likely to feel
painful, but those who audition several times a week find it much easier to
let such rejections go.
The reason this happens is because of a psychological process called
desensitization. The more we’re exposed to situations we find uncomfortable
or unpleasant, the more used to them we become and the less they disturb us.
Of course, this isn’t true for all situations and it certainly isn’t true for some
of the more significant or profound rejections we might encounter. Some life
experiences are acutely painful and emotionally damaging no matter how
repetitive they become. But when it comes to situations such as asking
people out on dates, calling prospective employers for jobs, applying to
internships or other educational programs, or initiating new friendships,

trying to desensitize ourselves can be beneficial.
I once had a male patient in his twenties whose fear of rejection made him
hesitant to approach women, and I gave him the task of asking out nine
women in one weekend. He had plans to attend three different social events,
and I promised him that if he approached three women per event, by the time
he got to the third (a birthday party for a work colleague) he would feel very
differently about the prospect of getting turned down. Interestingly, merely
agreeing to the challenge had an immediate impact on him. “The thought of
approaching so many women made me feel kind of confident before I even
began. Once I accepted that I’d be getting rejected a lot, it made the idea of
any one woman rejecting me seem more manageable for some strange
reason.”
As we now know, that “strange reason” is actually desensitization. My
patient never made it to the third social event. He struck out three times at
the first event of the weekend, but was shocked when two women gave him
their number at the second, “and one of them wasn’t even fake!” he reported
happily. The young man ended up skipping the third event in order to go on a
date with the woman who had given him her nonfake number.
Desensitization can be an effective technique for reducing the emotional
impact of rejections but it should be used both sparingly and wisely. It is one
of those treatments that should come with clear warning signs on the label.
Readers should be advised to treat themselves with desensitization only if
they feel their self-esteem is up for the challenge and only after giving
careful thought to how they could implement the treatment in ways they
would find beneficial. The most important aspect is to concentrate our efforts
into a limited time frame, as spreading out the task over time dilutes it and
renders it ineffective. For example, if my patient hadn’t had several social
events planned, it would have been harder for him to find the right
circumstances in which to ask out nine women within three days.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: DESENSITIZE YOURSELF
Dosage: Administer for specific tasks only: when seeking to initiate dates
or friendships, when applying to jobs, internships, or other programs, or
when making cold calls.

Caution: Use sparingly and wisely, as this treatment involves significant
discomfort. Use only if you feel your self-esteem can tolerate being
exposed to numerous “minor” rejections.

Effective for: Creating a layer of resilience to future rejections so as to
reduce the hurt feelings and emotional pain they evoke and the damage to
self-esteem they cause.

When to Consult a Mental Health Professional
Applying emotional first aid following rejections should soothe each of the
four wounds we typically suffer as a result of such experiences and reduce
our risk of long-term psychological complications. Treating older rejections
might also be beneficial as it can help nudge us toward a path of healing and
recovery. However, some rejections are so painful and the wounds they
create are so deep, emotional first aid alone is not sufficient to correct the
psychological damage they cause.
If the rejection you’ve experienced is profound (e.g., you’ve been rejected
by your entire family or community because of your sexual orientation or
religious beliefs) or if you’ve experienced chronic rejection over a period of
time, you might benefit from seeking the advice of a mental health
professional. If you’ve applied the treatments in this chapter and your
emotional pain did not subside, your self-esteem remains too damaged, and
engaging with people feels too risky, you should consult a mental health
professional. If your anger and aggressive impulses have become too
powerful for you to control, or if you have any thoughts of harming yourself
or others, seek the immediate help of a mental health professional or go to
your nearest emergency room.

CHAPTER 2
LONELINESS
Relationship Muscle Weakness
Our world is shrinking. Social media platforms allow us to stay in touch with
dozens if not hundreds of friends at once, dating websites offer us lavish
smorgasbords of potential mates we can peruse from the comfort of our
homes, and a simple click of a computer key allows us to forge new
connections with strangers from across the globe who share our interests and
passions. Yet, despite this era of unprecedented global human connection,
more people than ever are suffering from severe loneliness.
The 2010 U.S. Census found that 27 percent of households in America are
single-person households, now outnumbering all other groups (such as oneor two-parent households with children). Of course, not everyone who lives
alone is lonely and not everyone who is lonely lives alone. Many of us suffer
from loneliness despite living with a spouse or being in a committed
relationship. In fact, cohabitating with someone with whom we share a
physical proximity but little else often highlights the immense emotional
distance and profound disconnection we feel, leading to powerful feelings of
isolation.
What determines our loneliness is not the quantity of our relationships but
rather their subjective quality, the extent to which we perceive ourselves to
be socially or emotionally isolated. Indeed, many of us have address books
full of casual acquaintances yet still ache from a lack of deep friendships.
Some of us have a tight network of supportive friends yet feel the acute
absence of a romantic partner. We might spend our days surrounded by work
colleagues yet feel removed and isolated from all of them. We might be
blessed with strong familial relationships but find ourselves geographically
distant from those who care for us most. Those of us who are fortunate
enough to grow into old age with our health and faculties intact might
experience a rising tide of loneliness as we witness friends and partners
succumb to illness and die one after the other.

What Loneliness and Cigarette Smoking Have in
Common
Having meaningful relationships is essential for leading a happy and selffulfilled life, but chronic loneliness can damage us in ways that go far
beyond limiting our basic happiness. In addition to the emotional pain and
longing loneliness causes, it is also associated with clinical depression,
suicidal thoughts and behaviors, hostility, and sleep disturbances.
More important, loneliness has an alarming effect on our general health. It
alters the functioning of our cardiovascular systems (leading to high blood
pressure, increased body mass index, and higher cholesterol), our endocrine
systems (increasing stress hormones), and even our immune systems. As an
illustration of how directly loneliness impacts our physical health, one study
found that in otherwise healthy college students, lonely students had a
significantly poorer response to flu shots than nonlonely students did.
Loneliness also causes a decline in our mental abilities, including poor
decision making, decreased attention and concentration, impaired judgment,
and a more rapid progression of Alzheimer’s disease.
Shocking as it may seem, loneliness poses just as large a risk factor for our
long-term physical health as cigarette smoking does, as it literally shaves
years off our life expectancy. While cigarette packs come with health
advisories, few of us are aware of the dangers of inhaling two packs a day of
social isolation. As a result, feeling lonely rarely triggers a sense of urgency
and we rarely prioritize the need to break free of its clutches and treat our
psychological wounds.

Loneliness Is Contagious
Another factor that adds urgency to our need to treat the psychological
wounds loneliness inflicts is that recent studies have demonstrated something
rather stunning—loneliness is contagious! One study tracked the spread of
loneliness within social networks over time and found that loneliness spreads
through a clear contagion process: individuals who had contact with lonely
people at the start of the study were more likely to become lonely themselves
by the end of it. Further, the virulence of the contagion depended on the
degree of closeness between the lonely and nonlonely person. The closer

nonlonely individuals were to a lonely person the more virulent the effect of
the contagion and the lonelier they became later on.
Specifically, scientists found that lonely individuals were continually
pushed toward the periphery of their social networks and into positions that
were increasingly more isolated. Once people were in close contact with
lonely people they became affected and were pushed toward the periphery as
well. Alarmingly, this contagion was “transmitted” from one person to
another even beyond the immediate circle of the lonely person, such that it
spread throughout the entire social network. Such studies help demonstrate
both why and how loneliness is at epidemic proportions in today’s society.
Unfortunately, despite its contagiousness and despite the severity of the
health risks it poses, loneliness remains one of the most neglected
psychological injuries we sustain in daily life. Few of us realize how crucial
it is to treat the psychological wounds loneliness inflicts and fewer still know
how to do so effectively.

The Psychological Wounds Loneliness Inflicts
Given the severity of the risk loneliness poses to our physical and mental
health, we should make every effort to escape its impact as soon as possible.
However, two factors are likely to make it challenging for us to do so. First,
loneliness causes us to become overly critical about ourselves and those
around us, and it makes us judge our existing relationships too negatively, all
of which impact our interactions with others. Second, one of the more
insidious effects of loneliness is that it leads us to behave in self-defeating
ways that diminish the quality and quantity of our social connections even
further. As a result, the very fibers that comprise our “relationship
muscles”—our social and communication skills, our ability to see things
from another person’s perspective, and our ability to empathize and
understand how others feel—become weak and are likely to function poorly
when we need them most.
To be clear, it is not our fault that we are lonely, nor is it usually a
reflection on our social desirability. But regardless of the circumstances that
cause it, once loneliness sets in, it triggers a set of psychological reactions
that can lead us to inadvertently perpetuate our situation and even to make it
worse. Because such dynamics usually operate outside our awareness, the

most important tool we can carry with us going forward is an open mind. We
might strongly believe we’ve done everything in our power to change our
situation and that we’re certainly doing nothing to make matters worse. But
by being open to the possibility that our behaviors might be contributing to
our predicament, we can be open to discovering ways to change them.
Difficult as it is to open our hearts and minds, to challenge our established
perspectives, and to take emotional risks, we must be brave enough to do so
if we wish to treat our loneliness.

1. Painful Misperceptions: Why We Feel Invisible but Our
Loneliness Isn’t
People confide many negative things about themselves to their therapists, but
one of the things people rarely have the courage to admit is how lonely they
feel. Loneliness carries a stigma of shame and self-blame that operates in all
our minds to some extent. Over 40 percent of adults will suffer from
loneliness in their lifetime and virtually all of them will think poorly of
themselves because of it. Indeed, one of the more significant emotional
wounds loneliness creates is that it leads us to develop inaccurate perceptions
of ourselves as well as of others and to take too harsh a view of our existing
relationships and social interactions.
Lionel, a former World War II officer who received numerous medals for
valor, was referred to me for psychotherapy some years ago by his daughter,
a social worker who lived out of town and was concerned about her father’s
increasing social isolation. Lionel lived alone (his wife had died some years
before), and although his daughter called him every day, their conversations
were usually quite brief as Lionel believed that “phones are for making
appointments, not for idle chitchat!” I quickly learned that Lionel was not a
fan of any kind of chitchat, idle or otherwise, something that made our
sessions somewhat challenging at first. For example, my efforts to assess the
extent of Lionel’s social isolation went something like this.
“Who else do you speak with regularly other than your daughter?”
“Housekeeper. Comes twice a week. Cooks and cleans.”
“Tell me about the conversations you have with her.”
“She tells me what she made. I leave her money on the counter.”
“What about other family members?”

“No relatives other than my daughter.”
“What about friends from the service or even former colleagues, are you in
touch with any of them?”
“No.”
“Why do you think that is?”
“Because they’re dead.”
I resisted the urge to sigh and gave Lionel a sympathetic nod. I kept
probing and eventually discovered that Lionel did engage in one regular
social activity—he belonged to a chess club. Every Tuesday Lionel would
put on a jacket and tie and go down to the seniors’ center to play a couple of
games. Unfortunately, as far as games go, chess is about as conducive to
social interaction as solitaire is, if not less so. True, chess does require two
people to play, but any talking during the game is strictly discouraged as it
can interfere with the concentration of the other player.
“Do you play with the same people?” I inquired. I was curious about
whether any of the regulars tended to meet outside of chess club hours.
“Mostly.”
“Have you ever socialized with any of them?”
“They’re not interested.”
“How do you know?”
“Why would they want to socialize with me? I’m eighty!” I doubted that
age was the real issue. The club was for seniors, after all; how much younger
could the other players be?
“You’re eighty and they are...?”
“Not interested.”
“Do they socialize with one another?”
“Sometimes.”
“And they’ve never invited you to join them?”
“They’re not interested!”
Lionel was convinced the other, “younger” members of the chess club
would rebuff any attempt he made to forge friendships with them, despite the
fact that he had no evidence whatsoever that his age or anything about him
would cause them to snub him. But he was determined to avoid

disappointment and rejection at all costs. He arrived right before game time
and left immediately following the last round. He approached no one and
spent coffee breaks sitting in a corner reading a book. In other words, he
gave the other chess club members no opportunity whatsoever to get to know
him.
Lionel had already been suffering from loneliness for some years when we
first met and his self-defeating strategies were already well entrenched.
However, the damage loneliness inflicts on our perceptions of social
situations can happen extremely quickly. For example, scientists found that
simply asking college students to recall a time in their life when they felt
lonely or socially isolated was sufficient to elicit from them a more negative
assessment of their current social support systems as well as to boost their
shyness, increase their social anxiety, cause a drop in their mood and selfesteem, and impair their optimism.
Loneliness also causes us to evaluate others more harshly and to perceive
our interactions with friends and loved ones more negatively than we would
if we were not lonely. Another study videotaped students as they interacted
with a friend and then asked them to rate the quality of the interaction and
that of the friendship. Lonely individuals rated both their interactions and
their friendships far more negatively than nonlonely people did. The
participants were then shown the videotapes again one week later. While
there was no change in the assessments of nonlonely people, lonely people
rated their friendships even more negatively the second time around.
Lionel believed the members of the chess club ignored him and
marginalized him because he was essentially invisible to them. However, the
tragic irony of loneliness is that while we often feel invisible to others, our
loneliness is usually very visible to them indeed. Numerous studies have
found that lonely people are easily recognizable to others and that once
we’re judged as being lonely we’re likely to be viewed negatively as a result.
Lonely people are often seen as less attractive and even less intelligent than
nonlonely people (physical attractiveness provides no immunity from
loneliness whatsoever; attractive individuals might draw a greater quantity of
people initially but the quality of their relationships are no different and they
are just as likely to experience loneliness).
The bottom line is that loneliness affects perceptions in numerous ways. It
impacts how we perceive ourselves and others, as well as how we perceive

the quality of our interactions and our relationships. Loneliness also impacts
how others perceive us, making us appear less interesting and less appealing
as social prospects. The combination of these factors makes it extremely
difficult to shed our cloaks of invisibility and engage in successful efforts to
forge new social connections or deepen existing ones.

2. Self-Defeating Prophecies: Why Trying Harder Leads to
Failure
Many journeys into loneliness begin during periods of transition and change.
College freshmen often feel extremely lonely when they first arrive at
college, surrounded by unfamiliar faces, far from home, and removed from
the comfort of their friendships. Divorce, separation, and bereavement,
especially when they befall us unexpectedly, can leave us entirely unprepared
for the palpable loneliness that accompanies such losses. When work and
colleagues provide our primary source of social interaction and engagement,
losing our job can mean losing our entire social support system when we
most need it. Relocations and emigrations are often characterized by
extended periods of loneliness as we labor to build new social and support
networks from scratch.
In each of these cases, we typically emerge from loneliness once we adjust
to our new realities and rebuild our social infrastructures. Most college
freshmen eventually make new friends, divorced people typically begin to
date within a year following their separation (although it takes longer in
cases of bereavement), looking for a new job often requires us to network
and to contact people with whom we lost touch, and most of us eventually
forge social and intimate connections in our new towns and communities.
Yet, at times, the cold grip of loneliness extends far beyond the normative
adjustment period. We become trapped in it, paralyzed by waves of
emotional pain, defeated by feelings of worthlessness and hopelessness, and
overcome by the devastating emptiness of our profound social and emotional
isolation.
Why does this happen? What is it that prevents some of us from breaking
free of the bonds of loneliness and getting our lives back on track?
The answer is that in addition to painful misperceptions, loneliness also
drives us into cycles of self-protection and avoidance that cause us to create

self-fulfilling prophecies and to inadvertently push away the very people we
hope to engage.
Serena, a high school teacher I worked with recently, found herself in
exactly such a vicious cycle and she too was entirely unaware of it. What
brought her to psychotherapy was her “nonexistent dating life.” At first I was
at a loss to understand why she had never been in a serious relationship. She
was in her midthirties and, furthermore, she was simply stunning. I had no
doubt that she received plenty of attention from men. I soon learned that
Serena’s appearance had gone through a radical transformation four years
earlier, when she lost eighty pounds.
“I was heavy my whole life. Men would look right past me as if I wasn’t
even in the room. And trust me,” Serena added with a wistful smile, “I was
hard to miss. Now they stare, they smile, they wink, and somehow it still
feels the same. Like they’re responding to my appearance, but when it comes
to who I am as a person, they’re still looking right past me.”
Serena was desperate to find a husband, but she was equally desperate to
avoid getting hurt. While her hesitancy and mistrust were certainly justified
after the years of rejection and loneliness she’d experienced, her fears caused
her to come across as withdrawn, defensive, and suspicious. As a result, her
dates with men were often tense and awkward, and few of the men expressed
an interest in seeing her again. Their failure to follow up only confirmed
Serena’s suspicions that they were never interested in the “real her” to begin
with. The fact that the “real Serena” spent every moment of her dates hiding
behind a psychological wall and was never truly present in the first place was
something she never considered.
The reason we get trapped in such cycles is that loneliness tips the balance
of our social motivations. Once we feel vulnerable and socially disconnected
we become intensely self-protective and we seek to minimize any potential
negative responses or rejection from others. As a result we approach people
with distrust, suspicion, cynicism, and anxiety or we make efforts to avoid
them altogether. Because we don’t expect our social interactions to be
positive, we make fewer efforts to seek them out and we are less responsive
to them when they occur.
Unfortunately, the longer our loneliness lasts, the harder it can become to
change our perceptions and behaviors and to break the cycle of self-defeating
thoughts and behaviors that perpetuate it. We end up behaving in ways that

push away the very people who could alleviate our loneliness and we then
view their distance as further evidence of our basic undesirability. As a result
we feel like passive victims in a harsh world and fail to realize the extent to
which we are active contributors to our own predicament.

3. Atrophied Relationship Muscles: We Use Them or We Lose
Them
Alban, a successful sales executive, came to couples therapy with his wife,
Blanca, after months of urging on her part. “Blanca accuses me of being
married to my job and I guess I am. It’s not that I want to be, but my job
demands it. Blanca gets frustrated that I have to work even when I’m home
and I totally understand how she feels.” Alban put his arm around his wife
and gave her a wink. “I keep telling her it’s natural for the ‘other woman’ to
feel jealous.”
Blanca quickly pulled away. “You know I don’t think that’s funny!”
Blanca turned to me and said, “He keeps telling people that joke and I hate
it.” She turned back to Alban and her eyes welled with tears. “It’s not that
you’re away so much that bothers me, it’s that there’s a real disconnect
between us when you are home. There’s no affection, no romance, no
intimacy. I’m lonely and miserable ... and you don’t care.”
Alban’s eyes also welled up. “Of course I care! And I feel lonely too. But
it’s hard to connect when you’re angry all the time. Last week I brought you
flowers and a card for Valentine’s Day and all you did was yell at me.”
“Because you never even gave them to me! You were in such a rush to
check e-mails from work you just left them on the kitchen counter. I only
discovered them two hours later and by then you were already asleep!”
“But I got them for you! You keep telling me it’s the thought that counts,
except it doesn’t!”
“You got them for me but you didn’t think to give them to me. Your
thought was to leave them on the kitchen counter in the same spot you leave
money for the cleaning lady!”
As their discussion progressed it became evident that leaving the flowers
on the kitchen counter was not the only instance of Alban’s good intentions
going awry. He clearly cared about Blanca, but something went consistently
wrong when it came to translating his feelings into actions. Given how angry

Blanca felt and the level of disconnection between them, it had clearly been
going wrong for some time.
When we lack meaningful and deep connections with others or when we
fail to invest in the relationships we have, we stop exercising the skill sets
required to maintain such relationships. Our “relationship muscles” function
in much the same way regular muscles do. When we fail to use relationship
muscles regularly (such as our ability to empathize or see things from the
other person’s perspective) or when we use them incorrectly, they atrophy
and become less functional.
The problem is we’re often unaware of just how weak our relationship
muscles have already become. Alban believed his relationship muscles were
functioning properly, but they were not. True, he’d invested thought and
effort in getting Blanca flowers and a card, but leaving his gifts on the
kitchen counter and forgetting about them undid any positive impact his
efforts might have had.
When we try to walk after spending a week in bed with the flu we are
often surprised by how our legs buckle under us and leave us in a heap on the
floor. While we are quick to realize our muscles have weakened in such
situations, we rarely have the same insight when it comes to poorly
functioning relationship muscles, no matter how many times we find
ourselves in a metaphorical “heap on the floor.” Indeed, rather than
concluding that his relationship muscles were faulty, Alban was convinced
Blanca was simply being unappreciative.
As another example, when we falter in our first dating efforts after a long
dry spell of being alone, we rarely attribute the result to our having rusty
dating skills and weak relationship muscles. Instead we take the rejection
extremely personally and assume it is merely a reflection of our fundamental
undesirability.
Even once we’re aware of the need to strengthen our relationship muscles,
we often fail to anticipate how uneven our efforts are likely to be. For
example, once I made Serena aware that she might be contributing to her
lackluster dating experiences, she was determined to change how she was
coming across to her dates. However, her first few efforts were just as
unsuccessful, this time because she was trying too hard and appearing too
desperate.
While improving our social skills is certainly doable, many who

experience loneliness face the far more daunting task of developing
relationship muscles we’ve never used before. Serena had no experience with
serious dating and Lionel had little to no experience and a very limited
tolerance for casual socializing and small talk. Alban, on the other hand,
lacked the ability to empathize, to understand Blanca’s needs and feelings
well enough to make his efforts meaningful to her. In all of these cases, they
needed to learn new skills and find the courage to practice them, despite the
emotional risks involved.
Lionel was a good example of someone who regularly overlooked vital
information of this sort. I was eventually able to persuade him to approach
Stanley, the chess club member whom he enjoyed playing against most, and
suggest they grab coffee. We discussed how important it was to precede the
actual request with a comment or two about the game, so as not to come
across as too abrupt. Lionel came into our next session and immediately
informed me that he had taken the plunge and asked Stanley to have coffee
with him.
“Great!” I responded. “So he said yes?”
“He declined.”
I tried to hide my disappointment. “I’m sorry to hear that. Did he say
why?”
“He didn’t have to. It’s because he’s a sore loser.” Lionel went on to
explain that Stanley used to be the best player in the club until Lionel joined
and that he’d lost to Lionel regularly ever since. I was dismayed that Lionel
had not thought this information important enough to mention earlier. Had he
considered things from Stanley’s perspective, he might have realized that
winning all his games, refusing to interact with the other members, and
reading in the corner during breaks made Lionel appear aloof if not actually
disdainful of the others, Stanley most of all.
Understanding a person’s needs and feelings from his or her perspective is
vital for creating and sustaining close friendships and emotional intimacy.
When these relationship muscles are weak, we overlook crucial information
about how the other person thinks and feels and our efforts often fail.

How to Treat the Psychological Wounds Loneliness

Inflicts
Many of the circumstances that lead to being lonely are temporary and allow
us to recover in a relatively short amount of time. For example, kids usually
forge new friendships within hours or days of starting summer camp, and
people whose relationships make them feel lonely might actually feel
relieved after a separation if they take steps to reconnect with friends and
loved ones with whom they had lost touch. Treating the wounds of loneliness
becomes much more urgent when we’ve been in its grips for extended
durations and when we feel discouraged about being able to change our
social and emotional isolation. Let’s open our psychological medicine
cabinet and review our treatment options.

General Treatment Guidelines
In addition to the pain and suffering loneliness causes, three other
psychological wounds require emotional first aid. First, we must identify and
change the misperceptions that lead to self-defeating behaviors. Although we
might struggle to see such patterns, if we’ve been lonely for some time, they
are definitely there. Second, we need to strengthen and enhance our
relationship muscles so that our efforts to forge new connections and deepen
existing relationships will be more successful, meaningful, and satisfying.
Third, we need to minimize the ongoing emotional distress loneliness causes,
especially in cases in which the options for improving existing social
connections and creating new ones are limited.
The treatments that follow are listed in the order in which they should be
administered. Treatments A (challenging negative perceptions) and B
(identifying self-defeating behaviors) are effective primarily for correcting
the misperceptions loneliness causes and the self-defeating behaviors that
result. Treatments C (taking the other person’s perspective) and D
(deepening emotional bonds) will help strengthen relationship muscles
crucial for forming new connections or deepening existing ones. Treatment E
(creating opportunities for social connection) will help identify new avenues
for social engagement; and Treatment F (adopting animals) discusses ways to
reduce the emotional suffering loneliness inflicts and is especially suited for
people with limited options to expand or improve the quality of their social
connections (because of geographic isolation, health or mobility limitations,

or other special circumstances).
As with all emotional injuries, it is best to treat the wounds loneliness
inflicts as soon as possible. The longer we go without exercising the full
range of our relationship muscles, the more they will atrophy and the longer
it will take for us to regain their full functionality. Further, rehabilitating
muscles of any kind requires repetition, practice, and patience. If we try to
rush our recovery we are likely to reinjure ourselves and encounter setbacks
and disappointment. And remember, not all forms of loneliness can be
remedied by first aid techniques alone. At the end of the chapter, I discuss
when it is recommended to consult a mental health professional.

Treatment A: Remove Your Negatively Tinted Glasses
Loneliness makes us constantly on guard, prepared for the disappointment
and rejection we are sure will come. As a result, we miss opportunities to
make social connections and we behave in ways that push others away. In
order to challenge these distorted perceptions and avoid acting in selfdefeating ways we need to do three things.

1. Fight the Pessimism!
Loneliness makes our minds generate instant negative thoughts as soon as we
contemplate engaging in social interaction. We get invited to a party and
vivid scenes of awkwardness, rejection, and disappointment pop into our
heads entirely unbidden. We become convinced we won’t know anyone
there. We envision ourselves standing alone by the hummus and vegetable
dip, feeling conspicuous and embarrassed. The thought of approaching a
stranger or, worse, a group of strangers, and initiating a conversation is
enough to cause a sense of panic, and we anticipate any such efforts ending
disastrously.
Although we are unlikely to prevent pessimistic scenarios from elbowing
their way into our thoughts, the best way to fight our fears and pessimism is
to purposefully visualize scenarios of success that are both reasonable and
realistic. By picturing successful outcomes in our minds we are more likely
to recognize such opportunities when they arise and to take advantage of
them. For example, we could acknowledge that it is just as likely for people
at the party to be friendly, welcoming, and happy to meet and chat with us.

Even if we don’t meet new people, it’s just as possible we’d have a perfectly
nice time catching up with the one or two folks we do know. We might even
end the night by making plans to see them again in the near future.
Lionel had to overcome the belief that none of the other players in the
chess club were interested in socializing with him (“Why would they want to
socialize with me? I’m eighty!”). Once Stanley turned him down he was
extremely reluctant to approach anyone else. The first order of business was
to help Lionel see his part in creating the situation.
“You’ve been seeing things too negatively, Lionel,” I explained. “True,
they haven’t asked you to hang out but you also haven’t given them any
reason to do so. They know nothing about you, nothing about your life, and
nothing about your thoughts or feelings.”
“So you also think it’s pointless.” Lionel nodded.
“No, I’m saying the opposite. I’m saying it’s not as bleak as it seems and
that you can do something about it. Let them get to know you. Chat a little,
exchange pleasantries, kvetch about the weather, or ask about their weekend.
Make the effort for a couple of weeks and I assure you they will be far more
open to hanging out, even Stanley.”
Lionel was extremely hesitant to initiate conversation with the chess club
members, but when I appealed to his military experience and presented the
challenge as a mission he had yet to accomplish, he finally agreed. After a
few weeks of occasional chatting, he mustered the courage to ask another
member to coffee. They met at a diner several weeks later. I told Lionel how
impressed I was with his efforts. “I know it was difficult to open up and start
chatting but I’m so glad you did. I’m sure it made a difference with other
club members as well. Who knows,” I added, “maybe you and Stanley will
have coffee one day after all.”
“That’ll never happen,” Lionel said immediately.
“Here’s that negativity again,” I cautioned him.
“It just won’t happen,” Lionel insisted.
“Really?” I demanded. “Why not?”
“Because Stanley’s dead.”
Lionel told me Stanley had died two weeks earlier. His death led to the
other members talking more among themselves and getting closer. They
decided to attend Stanley’s memorial service later in the month and when

they did, Lionel went with them.

2. Give the Benefit of the Doubt!
Another misperception loneliness burdens us with is that we tend to assume
the worst about how others feel about us. Toby, a young man who had
recently lost his job, was devastated when the holiday season approached and
he failed to receive an invitation to his good friend’s annual Christmas party
(the friend still worked for the same company). Toby was convinced his
friend no longer wanted to be associated with him because he had been fired.
Since I knew Toby’s e-mail had recently changed (he had used his work email for personal communications) I suggested he check his spam folder. Lo
and behold, there was the invitation, where it had been all along. Toby had
spent the better part of two weeks feeling betrayed and mourning the loss of
a friendship that was still perfectly intact (although, if he had missed his
friend’s party with no explanation, it might not have been intact for long).
Loneliness might make us question how our friends feel about us, but we
should always balance our doubts with reminders of our mutual history and
the shared experiences that created and sustained the friendship over time.
Doing so will help reassure us that our friendships are probably a lot more
stable than our loneliness-fueled fears might lead us to believe.
Serena, the high school teacher who had gone from heavy to bombshell,
was also quick to judge others and their intentions toward her. She was
certain any man who expressed an interest in her did so solely because of her
appearance and had no intention of getting to know the “real” her. Although
men were unquestionably drawn to her appearance, they definitely cared
about her personality. Indeed, it was her closed and guarded behavior that
made most of them reluctant to ask her out again.
A couple of years later, at a social event, Serena bumped into one of the
men she thought had rejected her. She was extremely surprised when he
introduced her to his friends as “Serena, the beauty who dumped me after
one date.” Clearly, he had mistaken her guardedness for disinterest. Had
Serena given him the benefit of the doubt and expressed interest he would
have happily initiated a second date.
Understandable as our fears are when we already feel lonely and leery of
rejection, indulging them will only bring about the very thing we seek to

avoid. Instead, we must battle the internal tide of skepticism we feel and give
the new people in our lives and the ones with whom we have existing
relationships the benefit of the doubt.

3. Take Action!
Chronic loneliness causes us to perceive ourselves as passive victims of our
harsh circumstances and we feel helpless to change our social, emotional, or
intimate isolation. Such feelings, powerful as they might be, are nonetheless
founded on perceptions that are too negative and pessimistic. There are
always steps we can take to improve our situation. It is important to do so
because taking action of any kind will make us feel better about ourselves as
well as about our prospects. Lionel had a room full of chess players from
which to choose when it came to making new friends, Serena had numerous
men clamoring for her attention, and Toby had plenty of people from his
former job who were interested in continuing a friendship with him. Yet
loneliness made all of them perceive their situation as one in which their
options were severely limited.

EXERCISE FOR IDENTIFYING AVENUES FOR SOCIAL
CONNECTION
The following writing exercise will help identify potential actions you can
take to expand and deepen your social connections and, by doing so, counter
feelings of helplessness.
1. Go through your phone numbers, e-mail addresses, and social media
contacts and make a list of people you consider friends or good
acquaintances.
2. For each person, note when you last saw or communicated with him or her
and create a master list of people you haven’t been in touch with for a
while.
3. Prioritize your list by ranking all the people on it according to who in the
past has made you feel best about being you. Your final ranking represents
the order in which you should contact the people on your list. Reach out to
at least one or two people a week and, when possible, initiate plans to meet.
4. Go to websites that list meetings or activities and scroll through their
categories. For example, Meetup (meetup.com) is a website that lists

meetings for people with mutual interests, hobbies, passions, or careers.
Even if you don’t find a specific meet-up that fits your interests, such sites
are good places to get ideas for activities or hobbies that might intrigue
you.
5. Identify at least three activities or topics you might want to pursue (e.g.,
book clubs, adult education classes, hiking or biking groups). Search online
for meetings in your area.
Use your lists to recharge your old friendships and to explore venues for
creating new ones.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: REMOVE YOUR NEGATIVELY TINTED
GLASSES
Dosage: Administer full treatment and repeat as necessary until you’ve
revitalized your social or dating life.

Effective for: Correcting painful misperceptions and avoiding self-fulfilling
prophecies.

Secondary benefits: Reduces emotional suffering.

Treatment B: Identify Your Self-Defeating Behaviors
Loneliness makes us approach people with caution and suspicion, and our
hesitancy usually comes across loud and clear to others, prompting them to
retreat from our bad vibe. We then feel crushed and conclude we were right
to be suspicious and cautious in the first place. The fact that our own actions
created a self-fulfilling prophecy often eludes us entirely. As is often true in
life, when we act out of fear we risk inviting the very thing we hope to avoid.
But if our self-defeating judgments and behaviors seem completely
justified in our own minds, how are we to identify those that are selfsabotaging?
The truth is that while we’re often blind to our self-defeating behaviors in
the moment, we’re much better at identifying them in hindsight. For

example, we might feel justified in keeping to ourselves at a social event if
the few people we know are already engaged in other conversations. But
once our social anxiety has diminished the next day, we would probably
recognize that we could have simply joined their conversations or introduced
ourselves to at least one or two people we didn’t know.
More important, we tend to repeat the same self-defeating behaviors in a
variety of situations, which should make identifying them easier once we’re
alerted to their existence. Once we recognize what these tendencies are we
can become more mindful of them and catch them in action going forward.
So consider yourself alerted.
While the notion of analyzing our own behavior accurately might seem
daunting at first, when I ask patients to reflect on their social encounters and
identify their errors, they typically do so quite successfully. Once we accept
the basic premise that at least some of our actions are not serving us well, we
should be able to start identifying things we’ve said and done that might
have had unintended consequences. For example, Serena was quick to
recognize that she asked her dates very few questions about themselves and
that such omissions probably led her dates to conclude she had little interest
in them. In addition, her anxiety was such that she rarely smiled when she
was on a date and she was certainly too tense to laugh. Once she realized
this, she thought back on her dates with dismay but with insight.
“They must have thought I really wasn’t enjoying their company. Geez,
I’m one heck of a lousy date!”
“Lousy!” I agreed, which made Serena laugh. “But whether you continue
to be is up to you.”
Serena’s self-sabotaging behaviors are by no means unusual. Other
common forms of self-defeating behaviors are finding poor excuses to turn
down invitations to social events, skipping spontaneous get-togethers
because you’re “unprepared” either emotionally or otherwise, neglecting to
convey birthday wishes or other celebratory messages to friends and
colleagues, taking friendly ribbings too personally, using defensive body
language (e.g., folding your arms over your chest, standing with your hands
in your pockets, exaggerated rummaging through your purse, or faking
intense interest in nonexistent text messages), responding with curt or
monosyllabic sentences or overtalking and hogging the conversation,
neglecting to ask others about their lives and opinions, and confessing your

faults and insecurities to people you’ve just met.

EXERCISE TO IDENTIFY SELF-DEFEATING BEHAVIORS
Take time to reflect on how you might come across to your friends,
colleagues, and loved ones or when you are on a date or any other type of
social engagement. Try to identify at least three behaviors (including
omissions, such as not conveying interest), even if they seem entirely
justified and even if they seem relatively minor, that might be pushing other
people away.
1. My self-defeating behaviors are:
2. Once you’ve identified what you might be doing incorrectly, be extremely
mindful of avoiding such behaviors in the future. Keep your list handy and
read it before you attend social engagements. Self-defeating mechanisms
can be changed once you’ve identified them correctly but don’t expect to
eliminate them all at once. As we will see in the next section, all social
skills require practice.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: IDENTIFY BEHAVIORS THAT
WORK AGAINST YOU
Dosage: Administer full treatment as soon as possible after unsuccessful
social interactions. Make sure to go over your list before attending any
forthcoming social interactions so you can be as mindful as possible to
minimize self-defeating behaviors.

Effective for: Improving social and romantic interactions, avoiding selfdefeating behaviors, and correcting painful misperceptions.

Secondary benefits: Reduces emotional suffering.

Treatment C: Take the Other Person’s Perspective
Relationships of any kind are always about give-and-take. But to “give”
successfully we have to be able to “take” the other person’s point of view.

Known as perspective taking, accurately reading another person’s point of
view is a vital relationship muscle. It allows us to understand their priorities
and their motivations, to anticipate their behavior, and even to predict their
reactions. It enhances our ability to negotiate and cooperate successfully, to
strategize and problem-solve, to communicate effectively, and to access our
compassion, altruism, and empathy.
Loneliness and social isolation weaken our perspective-taking muscles and
make us far more likely to commit social gaffes or to come across as
inappropriate, too eager, or too detached. The fastest way to rehabilitate this
relationship muscle is to identify our perspective-taking blunders and to
correct them. The following three errors are the most important to keep in
mind, as they represent our most frequent oversights.

1. Failing to Engage Our Perspective-taking Muscles When We
Should
As simplistic as it may sound, the reason we usually don’t understand the
other person’s perspective is we never tried to in the first place. Perspective
taking is a mental exercise, not a mind-reading trick. If we don’t make the
effort to think through how other people might see things, how they might
react, or how their agenda might be different from our own, we are unlikely
to take such considerations into account when interacting with them. One
common manifestation of this omission involves our use of humor. When
we’re considering whether to tell a joke, we typically give almost exclusive
priority to whether we find the joke funny and fail to consider whether it will
be funny to others. Alban thought referring to his wife as “the other woman”
(relative to his job) was hilarious, while Blanca obviously did not. Had
Alban given even a moment’s thought to how she reacted to the joke in the
past, her feelings about it would have been immediately obvious to him.

2. We Favor Our Own Point of View
Our own perspective is so apparent to us that we often fail to give the other
person’s point of view sufficient weight. For example, scientists studied how
people interpret sincere versus sarcastic phone messages (where tone of
voice is helpful in detecting sarcasm) and those communicated by e-mail. We
are all aware that written messages lack tonal cues that help the recipient

understand our intended meaning. Yet time and again we anticipate readers
will be able to distinguish between our sincere and sarcastic e-mail messages
with the same accuracy as they would a phone message. And time and again
we are surprised to discover that our messages are taken the wrong way.
The reason this happens is that although we’re aware electronic
communications can easily be misinterpreted, we tend to assume such errors
are the reader’s fault; but research clearly demonstrates it is the person who
sends the message whose assumptions are faulty. To correct this specific
error we must give sufficient weight to how the other person might interpret
our electronic communications (and, no—emoticons are not the answer).

3. We Consider the Wrong Information
We often fail to consider accurate information that could potentially provide
insight into another person’s point of view (such as his or her facial
expressions) but happily consider inaccurate information (such as broad
stereotypes or gossip). For example, when evaluating the preferences of
people we perceive as similar to us, we tend to use ourselves as reference
points. But when we perceive others as being less similar, we are more likely
to resort to stereotypes to assess their preferences. Once we consider how
this dynamic might play out in gift-giving scenarios, it becomes clear why
Grandpa ended up with twenty-three pairs of woolen socks for Christmas but
without the Kindle he’d been hinting at since Thanksgiving.

Perspective-Taking Errors in Intimate Relationships
The more familiar we are with another person, the more accurate our efforts
to understand their point of view should be. As such, we might assume that
the longer a couple has been together, the fewer perspective-taking errors
they make with one another. But, as most couple therapists can attest,
couples who’ve been together longest are often those who exhibit the most
perspective-taking flubs.
Why does this happen?
Unfortunately, it is the couple’s very familiarity with one another that trips
them up. The more time we’ve spent with our partner the more confident we
feel in our ability to assess his or her point of view without giving it much
thought (perspective-taking error #1 in action). However, since familiarity

with a person rarely bestows the ability to read the person’s mind, such
confidence is likely to land us in the doghouse more often than not.
This blind spot can be extremely troublesome for intimate relationships.
For example, partners often dread birthdays and Valentine’s Day for this
exact reason. One thinks, “Why can’t my spouse ever get it right?” and the
other, “No matter how much trouble I go to, nothing is ever good enough.”
In reality, neither person is taking the time to examine things from the
partner’s point of view. If they did they would communicate with one
another and clarify their expectations ahead of time, rather than just playing
out the same gift-giving debacle year after year.
Of course, having such “relationship discussions” is not always easy. One
of the reasons Blanca initiated couples therapy with Alban was that he tended
to clam up whenever she tried discussing relationship issues with him.
Indeed, women are often more proficient than their husbands at discussing
their feelings and expectations, which can make men feel they’re fighting a
losing battle. Rather than saying the wrong thing, they prefer to say nothing
and get their “inevitable defeat” over with as soon as possible. The best way
for women to fight this tendency is to avoid outtalking their partners. Women
should give men the space and leeway to express their thoughts and even to
restate them (without incurring a “penalty”) if their words do not reflect their
true intent. When men are more proficient at emotional expression than their
partners, they should take similar precautions.
In short, we should always ask ourselves how the other person’s point of
view might differ from our own. We should give weight to what we know
about their priorities and preferences, to the history of the relationship
between us, and to the context of the current situation. Taking a few minutes
to answer such questions can save hours of relationship talks to smooth over
a situation that could have been prevented had we made the effort to think
through the other person’s perspective ahead of time.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: TAKE THE OTHER PERSON’S
PERSPECTIVE
Dosage: Administer full treatment and practice frequently. Do not get
discouraged by initial failures, as building and improving these skills
takes both time and practice.

Effective for: Rebuilding and strengthening weak relationship muscles,
improving social interactions, and enhancing relationships.

Secondary benefits: Reduces emotional suffering.

Treatment D: Deepen Your Emotional Bonds
Empathy involves stepping into another person’s shoes in order to gain an
understanding of their emotional experience and then conveying our insights
to them convincingly. Rather than merely acquiring their point of view as we
do when perspective taking, we seek a deeper understanding so we can
glimpse how they actually feel. Much as we do with perspective taking, we
regularly overestimate our capacity to employ empathy successfully. One of
the reasons this happens is that empathy is not necessarily an easy skill. It
requires a Jedi mind trick of sorts, albeit one we do to our own minds.
Specifically, we have to direct our awareness to a place it does not
automatically go—to what it actually feels like to be another person—linger
there for a moment until we register the other person’s emotional landscape,
and then return to our own reality.
Surveys of college students have found that their empathy skills have
decreased significantly over the past thirty years, which probably reflects a
larger societal trend. Most of us could use a tune-up when it comes to both
our empathy and perspective-taking skills. For example, Alban had trouble
understanding why his wife, Blanca, was so angry with him for leaving the
flowers and card he got her for Valentine’s Day on the kitchen counter. After
all, he’d not only remembered Valentine’s Day (as opposed to previous years
in which he had forgotten it entirely), but despite the huge amount of work
waiting for him when he got home he’d taken the time to stop and get his
wife tokens of his affection. When I asked Alban to consider things from
Blanca’s point of view, he quickly conceded he’d screwed up, but he just
didn’t understand why his good intentions counted for so little.

How to Access Our Empathy

The only way to gain insight as to how other people feel is to imagine
ourselves in their situation, not just for a second or two, but until we can use
our own emotional compass to point to how they might be feeling. To do so
accurately, we need a good sense of their emotional landscape—the context
leading up to the situation in question. For example, I asked Alban to
consider Blanca’s expectations, how she might have experienced the two
hours between the time he arrived home and when she discovered the card
and flowers on the kitchen counter.
“She saw me working in the study,” Alban said, thinking aloud, “but she
didn’t see the flowers because they were in the kitchen.” Alban’s eyebrows
shot up and he turned to Blanca. “You thought I’d forgotten Valentine’s Day
again! That’s why you didn’t respond when I said good night.”
Blanca nodded. I asked Alban to continue the exercise. “Now, taking that
into consideration, how did Blanca react when she saw you in the study?”
“She didn’t,” Alban said. “She must have been upset, but she didn’t say
anything because I was working.”
“So she was being considerate,” I said. Alban nodded. “So how was she
feeling right before she discovered the flowers in the kitchen?”
“She was upset and disappointed; but she decided to be considerate and
not discuss it with me until I finished working.”
“For two whole hours,” I pointed out. “She sat on her feelings for two
hours. You go to bed and only then does she pass by the kitchen.”
“And sees the flowers and cards on the counter,” Alban continued. “And ...
damn!” He turned to Blanca. “You must have thought I don’t even care
enough to hand them to you in person.” Blanca nodded. “You made efforts to
contain your disappointment all evening and I couldn’t even take a moment
to hand you the flowers in person.” Blanca nodded, exhaling deeply. Alban
put his arms around her. Slowly, she softened into his embrace. “I’m such an
ass,” Alban whispered. “How do you stand me?”
“You do make it difficult,” Blanca responded with a brief smile. Alban
quickly promised to take Blanca out for a belated Valentine’s dinner to make
it up to her.
I continued to work with Blanca and Alban for several months. Alban had
done a good job exercising his empathy muscles in the session, but it takes
more than a single empathy workout to build up relationship muscles to their

full strength. Alban continued to practice using empathy, and the more he
persisted, the happier he and Blanca became. Over time, and with lots of
work, their strained and distant marriage changed to one in which they both
felt trusted, supported, and cared for by the other.
Improving our empathy skills will do wonders for our most important
relationships. The caring and consideration that empathy conveys can spark a
cycle of goodwill, affection, and generosity of spirit that radically deepens
bonds of marriage, family, or friendship. Obviously this works best when
both people are strengthening their empathy muscles with one another at the
same time, but even unilateral efforts can bear significant fruit.
Because of the practice this skill requires, we should endeavor to practice
our empathy muscles in a variety of situations and with numerous people. In
doing so, we should seek opportunities to anticipate how people might feel
about future situations as well as past ones. Keep the following in mind:
Visualize yourself in their situation. The best way to assess another
person’s emotional experience is to visualize yourself in his or her situation
in as immersive a manner as possible. Take notice of the surrounding
environment, of who else is there, the time of day, the person’s mood, and
any physical pains or ills the person may be suffering from. Imagine how
you come across to him or her, not how you actually feel but what you
actually convey to the other person. Keep in mind that in many situations we
experience feelings that are contradictory. For example, when Blanca found
the flowers on the kitchen counter she probably felt pleased that Alban had
made the effort even though she also felt hurt, disappointed, and angry that
he’d executed it so poorly.
Context is key. Understanding someone’s feelings involves having at least
a rough sense of his or her frame of mind at the time. The following
questions are ones you might want to consider: What are the person’s
previous experiences with similar situations? What fears, doubts, hopes, or
expectations might he or she have about the situation? What else is
happening in his or her life at the time? What has his or her day been like up
to this point? How might other relationships be impacting his or her
responses?
Convey your insights thoughtfully. Having insight into another person’s
feelings only matters if we can convey our understanding convincingly and
compassionately. Knowing how someone feels but communicating it poorly

is akin to buying him or her flowers and then leaving them on the kitchen
counter. Be as descriptive as possible. The more the other person realizes
you’ve put thought and effort into appreciating his or her point of view, the
more impact your empathy-informed communications will have.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: DEEPEN YOUR EMOTIONAL BONDS
Dosage: Administer full treatment and practice frequently. Do not get
discouraged by initial failures, as building and improving these skills
takes both time and practice.

Effective for: Rebuilding and strengthening weak relationship muscles,
improving social interactions, and enhancing relationships.

Secondary benefits: Reduces emotional suffering.

Treatment E: Create Opportunities for Social
Connection
Loneliness makes us extremely hesitant to create new opportunities for social
engagement or to take advantage of existing ones. We feel uncomfortable
attending social events (especially those with too many unfamiliar faces), we
hate traveling by ourselves, and we are reluctant to sign up for new activities
or social groups because we dread showing up alone. We might see options
for social activities around us, but we fear coming across as “losers” or
“loners” and inviting the very stigma of loneliness we are desperate to
escape.
The best way to overcome feelings of vulnerability, reduce our hesitancy,
and avoid being labeled as lonely is to approach situations with a larger goal
in mind. For example, participating in a speed-dating event would feel far
less uncomfortable if we were doing so as research for an article on our blog
or college newspaper. We would be far less apprehensive about signing up
for a tour with other singles if we were amateur photographers or artists and
planned to paint, sketch, or photograph the sites we visited for our portfolios.

And we would find it easier to join a swimming, biking, or running group if
we were training for a triathlon.
By having an additional agenda, we come across not as someone who is
lonely, but as someone who is passionate about our hobby, devoted to our
goals, or serious about our creative endeavors. Having a larger goal also
helps reduce insecurity and self-consciousness because our attention is
focused on the task at hand; documenting our speed dates, creating art for
our portfolios, or making it through the triathlon.

Go Online
The Internet allows us to connect to people with whom we might share
common interests and experiences without leaving our homes. It also allows
us to adopt identities through which we can interact with others and express
ourselves in ways that might not be possible in our regular lives. For
example, Second Life (secondlife.com) is a three-dimensional virtual world
where users interact with one another using a digital representation of their
own choosing. Users can switch genders, make themselves older or younger,
choose how attractive they would like to be, and give themselves various
other characteristics and abilities. The interactions in Second Life cover the
gamut from chatting to virtual mating, from conducting business to
constructing homes, and participants report having meaningful friendships
and relationships with one another.
Relationships and friendships that start online can be substantial and they
often translate into in-person interactions. For example, a recent study found
that online dating is now the second most common way couples meet (being
introduced by mutual friends is the most common), surpassing previous
romantic venues, such as bars, clubs, and the vegetable aisle in the local
supermarket on Sunday afternoons.

Volunteer to Help Others
Another option for creating new social bonds is to volunteer. Helping others
reduces feelings of loneliness, increases feelings of self-worth, and makes us
feel more socially desirable to others. Helping others contributes to more
happiness and greater life satisfaction, and it can also reduce our fear and
hesitancy about engaging with new people (or indeed with people in

general). By setting out to give rather than get, we can focus on the person in
need instead of on ourselves, which in turn makes us feel less self-conscious,
less insecure, and less vulnerable.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: CREATE OPPORTUNITIES FOR SOCIAL
CONNECTION
Dosage: Administer full treatment as needed and repeat as necessary.

Effective for: Reducing emotional suffering and increasing opportunities
for social interaction.

Secondary benefits: Strengthens weak relationship muscles.

Treatment F: Adopt a Best Friend
In some cases, circumstances may prevent us from creating new social bonds
or enhancing existing ones. People with limited mobility, who are isolated
geographically, or who cannot reach out to others for various reasons
frequently adopt pets to soothe feelings of loneliness. Dogs are great at
soothing feelings of loneliness in people who are isolated, elderly, or dealing
with a significant illness or psychological injury such as post-traumatic stress
disorder. Dogs are also great people magnets, and many friendships and
relationships have started with the sentence, “Oh, your dog is so cute! What’s
its name?”
Attesting to the singular therapeutic powers of our canine friends, one
study had lonely people spend time alone with a dog or with another person
and a dog together. Those who spent time alone with a dog reported feeling
significantly less lonely than those who shared the company of the dog with
another person. Whether the “other persons” in the study were informed they
came in second to animals that drink out of the toilet and lick themselves is
unknown.
Despite the many advantages of dog therapy, adopting any pet, especially
a dog, is a huge responsibility and one that some of us cannot undertake for
practical reasons. Cats have been studied less frequently than dogs, but they

too can provide significant companionship and they are easier to care for
than dogs, especially by people who are homebound.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: ADOPT A BEST FRIEND
Dosage: Administer as needed and to the extent circumstances allow.

Effective for: Reducing emotional suffering.

When to Consult a Mental Health Professional
Treating loneliness with the emotional first aid techniques discussed in this
chapter should help soothe the emotional suffering loneliness creates, correct
the perceptions and behaviors that sabotage our efforts to deepen and expand
our emotional and social connections, and provide new opportunities for
social interaction.
However, if your emotional pain is so great you have thoughts of harming
yourself or others, or if you find yourself thinking about what it would be
like if you were no longer around, you should seek the immediate help of a
mental health professional or go to your nearest emergency room. If you
have not had self-injurious thoughts but nonetheless feel too hopeless or
discouraged to apply these first aid treatments, or if you’ve tried to do so but
were unsuccessful, a mental health professional could help you assess factors
that might be holding you back and provide the emotional support necessary
for you to move forward.

CHAPTER 3
LOSS AND TRAUMA
Walking on Broken Bones
Loss and trauma are an inevitable part of life, and their effects are often
devastating. Losing a loved one, being victims of violence or crime,
becoming disabled, developing a chronic or life-threatening illness, being
exposed to terrorism or war, or living through other life-threatening and
traumatic experiences can derail our lives and leave deep psychological
wounds. Healing such wounds usually involves an extended process of
readjustment and recovery that can be different for each of us. Much like
broken bones that need to be set correctly, how we go about putting the
pieces of our lives back together after loss or trauma makes a huge difference
in how fully we recover from such events.
Some of the losses and traumas we experience are so deeply scarring they
require the skills of expert mental health professionals and probably
extended psychotherapy. As such, this chapter is not intended for those
who’ve suffered extremely adverse impacts, and such readers are strongly
advised to seek help from a trained mental health professional if they have
not already done so.
However, many of the losses and traumatic experiences we sustain in life
are not severe enough to cause long-term psychological or emotional
damage. For example, when we lose our job, when our best friend drops us
after a bad argument, or when an elderly grandparent dies, we go through a
period of sadness and adjustment but we usually return to our previous level
of psychological and emotional health. However, the same loss can have
different subjective meanings to different people. For example, if losing our
job caused our family to become homeless, if our best friend was also our
only friend, or if our grandparent raised us and had been in good health, the
loss we experience and the impact it has on our lives can be far more
substantial.
Whatever differences we might exhibit in how we cope with loss and
trauma, we all face similar challenges when it comes to rebuilding our lives

and achieving a full emotional and psychological recovery. We have to reset
our broken psychological bones—reassemble the pieces of our lives back
into a well-integrated and fully functional whole. Treating the psychological
wounds loss and trauma inflict can not only accelerate our recovery but in
some cases make it possible to emerge from such experiences with
meaningful changes in our priorities, a deeper appreciation of our existing
relationships, an enhanced sense of purpose, and greater life satisfaction—a
phenomenon known as post-traumatic growth.
While many of the variables that determine whether we emerge from loss
and trauma with diminished or enhanced emotional well-being are not in our
control (such as the severity of the events, our basic psychological makeup,
and our previous exposure to hardships), some are. In order to best utilize the
emotional first aid treatments in this chapter we will need a clear
understanding of the psychological wounds loss and trauma inflict and the
challenges they present to our mental health and emotional well-being.

The Psychological Wounds Loss and Trauma Inflict
In addition to the severe emotional distress they cause and the real-world
changes we have to contend with in their aftermath, loss and trauma inflict
three psychological wounds, each of which represents a different set of bones
that need to be reset. First, loss and trauma can create such havoc in our lives
that they threaten our self-perceptions, our roles, and our very sense of
identity. Second, tragic events often challenge our fundamental assumptions
about the world and our place in it, such that we struggle to make sense of
the events or to integrate them into the larger framework of our belief
systems. Third, many of us find it difficult to remain connected to the people
and activities we used to find meaningful and we might even feel as if
reengaging in our lives would represent a betrayal to those we’ve lost or a
discounting of the suffering we’ve experienced.
Emotional pain engulfs all who experience loss and trauma but the extent
to which we encounter these three psychological wounds can vary
dramatically. Some of us might experience them only in mild form while
others might find their lives profoundly impacted by them for years and even
decades. Let’s examine each of them in greater detail.

1. Life Interrupted: Overwhelming Emotional Distress
The emotional distress we experience in the first torturous days following
loss or trauma can be utterly paralyzing. We might lose the ability to think
straight or to perform even the most basic functions of self-care, such as
eating or bathing. Engulfed in emotional pain, we often experience every
detail of our lives anew as we are forced to live through a wrenching series
of “firsts.” Our first meal without the person we lost, our first night alone
after being victims of violent crime, our first look in the mirror after the
events that altered the course of our lives. This endless array of “firsts” can
keep coming at us for weeks and months: our first trip to the supermarket
after separating from our spouse without buying his or her favorite foods, our
first Christmas after losing our job without money to buy gifts for our
children, or our first Thanksgiving without our recently deceased parent.
Every “first” evokes memories, painful longings, and deep yearnings for
that which we’ve lost, and we might find it hard to care about anyone or
anything else. Plunged into the depths of despair, our feelings might be
darker even than those experienced by people suffering from the most severe
clinical depression. However, grief is a normal psychological response to
extreme circumstances, not a mental disorder. Regardless of how searing our
initial emotional pain, it almost always subsides with time. As we begin to
absorb the reality of our loss or trauma, the visceral pain begins to dull, even
if by the most minute of measures.
Indeed, time is a hugely important factor in our recovery. We often move
past the most acute stages of grief and adjustment after six months—
although such timetables are obviously dependent on the nature of the loss or
trauma and its tangible as well as its subjective impacts on our lives. But
when we do not, whether because the loss or trauma we suffered was too
significant or because circumstances prevented us from moving through the
healing and recovery process as we should, we risk allowing ourselves to
become defined by our experiences. The most unique aspects that made us
who we are can become lost, subsumed by our grief, hidden from view such
that even we no longer glimpse them. Our interests, our creativity, our joy
and enthusiasm can all become obscured by sadness, pain, and endless
rumination about the past, and our lives become truly interrupted in every
sense of the word.

2. Identity Interrupted: How Loss and Trauma Challenge Our
Roles and Self-Definition
Grant was a sales rep with a promising career and a love for shooting hoops
with his friends when he wasn’t on the road. One winter evening, Grant and
two colleagues were driving to the airport after a long business trip when
snow and icy conditions contributed to their driver losing control of the car.
Grant was dozing off in the middle backseat when it happened.
“I went straight through the windshield, landed in the road, and lost
consciousness. I came to a few minutes later. I opened my eyes and saw one
of my colleagues lying right in front of me, dead. I tried to get up but I
couldn’t. I looked down and saw I was covered in blood. And my legs ... my
legs were missing.” Grant swallowed hard. This was our first session and,
judging by the emotions on his face, these were not events Grant spoke of
often.
“Next thing I remember is the hospital and the surgeries, many, many
surgeries.” Grant spent over a year in various hospitals, where doctors
treated his massive injuries and started him on a long road of intense
physical rehabilitation. He also attended psychological counseling sessions.
Grant’s broken body slowly began to heal but his mind did not.
“I can’t tell you how many times I wished I had died that night. It would
have been easier. People wanted to visit, but I couldn’t stand the thought of
seeing anyone. I couldn’t stand the thought of seeing myself either. Six years
later and I still can’t look in a mirror. When I do catch a glimpse of myself,
all I see is a stranger. The person I used to be died that night. This new
person, this broken-bodied cripple, is not me!”
My heart ached for Grant, not just for the horrible injuries he sustained but
because six years later he was still in such terrible emotional distress. The
psychological wounds inflicted by the loss and trauma he experienced were
as raw as ever. His broken psychological bones had never been reset
correctly and as a result, he never adapted to the new realities of his life.
Loss and trauma often force a new reality on our lives that, depending on
the severity of the events we’ve experienced, can completely redefine our
identities as well as the narrative of our life stories. Before the accident
Grant had defined himself by his career, by his outgoing personality, and by
his athleticism. But those three pillars of his identity were now completely
absent and played no role in his life at all. Grant desperately needed to

redefine his identity, to reconnect with the aspects of his personality and
character that remained buried beneath his grief, to decide what his life could
be about.
The challenge of redefining ourselves and our identities accompanies
many experiences of trauma and loss. We might have defined ourselves by
our careers and lost our jobs, we might have defined ourselves by our
couplehood and lost our partner, we might have defined ourselves by our
athletic ability and lost our health, or we might have defined ourselves by
our parenthood and seen our last child leave home. In each of these
situations we need to take the time to rediscover who we are, to search
within for things we find meaningful, and to find new ways of expressing
aspects of ourselves that lay dormant, buried under an avalanche of sorrow.
When we fail to do so we are left with a terrible void that only amplifies the
extent of our loss, fragments our basic sense of self, and sets us adrift in the
stormy seas of self-doubt and self-loathing.

3. Beliefs Interrupted: Why Loss and Trauma Challenge Our
Perceptions of the World
One of our most compelling human drives is the need to make sense of our
experiences in life. We each have our own way of understanding how the
world works (even if we’ve never articulated it to ourselves explicitly), and
we filter most of our experiences through that lens. Our beliefs and
assumptions about the world guide our actions and our decisions and they
often provide us with a sense of meaning and purpose. One person might
view everything that happens in life as “God’s will,” another might believe
“We reap what we sow,” some might believe “Everything happens for a
reason,” and others believe “Things happen for no reason at all.” Some of us
feel the world is generally fair while others are convinced the opposite is
true, and some of us believe life is largely predictable while others revel in
their belief that events are entirely arbitrary.
Whatever thoughts and perceptions we have about such things, loss and
trauma can challenge our basic assumptions about the world and how it
operates and cause us significant additional emotional distress as a result.
Our struggle to make sense of what happened often compounds our initial
shock and sends us on a desperate quest to integrate our new realities into a
framework of fundamental beliefs that no longer provide us with the security

they once did. Indeed, such “crises of faith” are common. We become
flooded with questions and doubts and we often embark on a search for
answers.
This intense need to make sense of things can leave us ruminating
incessantly about how the events occurred, why they happened the way they
did, and what we could have done to prevent them. We might analyze each of
a thousand small decisions and moments that, if altered, might have spared
us the painful realities we now face. As a psychologist working in New York
City during and after the events of September 11, 2001, I heard many such
questions expressed by my patients. “If only she had left a few minutes later
she would have missed her train and not been at her desk when the plane hit
the building,” “If he hadn’t moved to Boston he would not have been on that
plane,” and “If I hadn’t stopped to look up, the falling debris would have
missed me,” are all examples of the thoughts and ruminations shared by
many people on and after that horrific day.
We often spend months dwelling on such questions as we search for ways
to make sense of the events. While many of us begin making sense of
tragedy within six months of it occurring, many others fail to do so even
years later. Yet, the sooner we reconstruct our worldviews in ways that
integrate our experiences of the loss or trauma, the quicker the intensity and
frequency of our ruminations will diminish, the better our psychological
adjustment will be, and the less likely we will be to exhibit poor emotional
well-being and symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder.

4. Relationships Interrupted: Why We Struggle to Connect to
Those Who Remain
Maxine came to psychotherapy to deal with her looming fiftieth birthday.
Ten years earlier she had promised her husband, Kurt, she would celebrate
the milestone with him by flying to Africa and going on a safari. Maxine had
never left the country before, despite Kurt’s many pleas for her to do so over
the years. “It was ten years in the future, but it still wasn’t a vow I made
lightly,” she explained. “I fully intended to keep it.”
A few months after she turned forty, Kurt began to get severe headaches.
“They gave him one test after another, but they couldn’t figure it out,”
Maxine explained. “Then they did a brain scan. The doctor told us he had a

tumor. They would try to remove as much of it as they could, but basically,
they gave him three years at most. We cried each other to sleep for nights.
Kurt was terrified of the surgery. He knew there was a lot that could go
wrong. Right before they wheeled him into the operating room I promised
him that as soon as he recovered from the operation we would go on the
safari and that we would travel as much as we could in whatever time we had
left together. He smiled for the first time in weeks.”
Maxine paused to wipe tears from her eyes. “He died in surgery two hours
later,” she said, her hands trembling, tears now streaking down her face. “I
miss him ... so much! I still talk to him every day: when I get home from
work, when I get up in the morning. I know this sounds crazy, but I even
make his favorite dinner once a week. It comforts me, makes me feel less
alone.” Maxine gathered herself and continued. “I’m here because my fiftieth
birthday is coming up in six months ... and I don’t know what to do. A part of
me feels as though I have to keep my promise and go on the safari. But to do
that without Kurt, to go without him, I’m not sure I could stand it.”
Maxine and Kurt had no children, but they had enjoyed a thriving social
life organized primarily around their love for camping and the outdoors.
However, in the years since Kurt died, Maxine had lost touch with most of
their old friends and she had given up camping and even hiking altogether.
Her social network consisted of a sister who lived on the west coast and a
few casual friends from work with whom she had dinner every few months.
When I asked her if she ever considered dating again she dismissed the
notion immediately and explained that doing so would feel as though she
were betraying Kurt.
Many of us respond to profound loss by withdrawing into ourselves,
obsessing about the person who died, talking to the person in our heads, and
imagining his or her thoughts and reactions to our experiences. However,
such phases are usually temporary. In time, we begin to let go of the person
we’ve lost and move on, either by reengaging with the people and activities
that populated our lives previously or by finding new people or experiences
in which to invest our emotions and energies. But some of us become stuck.
We maintain vivid representations of the person we lost, we hang on to the
person’s memory, and we keep investing our emotional resources in the dead
instead of the living.
As another example, Sean, a young man I worked with in the summer and

fall of 2001, lost his first cousin and best friend, a firefighter who died when
the North Tower collapsed. In the months that followed, Sean became
obsessed with the Twin Towers themselves. He spent all his free time
watching hours of documentaries and films about their construction, reading
everything he could find about their history, and researching various aspects
of the buildings’ maintenance and operations. Meanwhile, he withdrew from
his large family. He refused to attend family gatherings and generally
avoided the very people who shared his loss and grief the most.
While such coping mechanisms are reasonable in the aftermath of tragic
events, when they continue too long we risk getting stuck in the past as Sean
and Maxine did. In many cases, such habits represent a breakdown in our
grieving process. Instead of resetting our broken bones, healing, and
redefining ourselves and our lives anew, we end up adrift in our memories,
relating more to what no longer exists than to what does. When left
untreated, such patterns can persist for years and even decades, putting our
lives on hold and keeping our futures tethered to the loss and trauma that
have come to define us.

How to Treat the Psychological Wounds Loss and
Trauma Inflict
Loss and trauma can shatter the pieces of our lives, ravage our relationships,
and subvert our very identities. To put the pieces back together—to reset our
broken bones—we first need to recover from the overwhelming emotional
distress we feel in the immediate aftermath of loss or trauma. While the
treatments in this chapter can help, if the tragedy you’ve suffered is
profound, if years have passed and you have yet to recover from the events,
or if you experience symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, such as
intrusive flashbacks, nightmares, emotional numbness, or jumpiness and
agitation, you should seek the counsel of a trained mental health
professional. Let’s open our psychological medicine cabinet and review our
treatment options.

General Treatment Guidelines
Loss

and

trauma

create

four

psychological

wounds.

They

cause

overwhelming emotional pain, they undermine our basic sense of identity
and the roles we play in life, they destabilize our belief systems and our
understanding of the world, and they challenge our ability to remain present
and engaged in our most important relationships.
The treatments in this section are presented in an order that roughly
mirrors the sequence of psychological adjustment and recovery we go
through as we heal from loss and trauma. Treatment A (soothing emotional
pain) suggests guidelines for how to manage emotional pain and discusses
common fallacies that can delay our recovery. Treatment B (recovering lost
aspects of “self”) is focused on reconnecting to aspects of life that might
have gotten lost and reestablishing a sense of identity, and should be
administered only once we’ve returned to normal functioning within the
home, at work, or in school. Treatment C (finding meaning in tragedy) is
focused on making sense of the events and moving closer to finding meaning
and even benefit in them. Treatment C should be reviewed first and then
completed only after enough time has passed for our initial emotional pain to
subside and we feel emotionally strong enough to do so.
If you feel as though any of the exercises and treatments in this chapter
would be too painful to complete, please review the section at the end of the
chapter that discusses when to seek help from a mental health professional.

Treatment A: Soothe Your Emotional Pain Your Way
Working in New York City during and after the events of September 11,
2001, I found that the majority of my patients, as well as those of most
mental health professionals, were personally affected by the tragedy in some
way. One of my patients was killed when the plane struck the South Tower,
some were injured in the attacks, others’ homes were destroyed when the
buildings collapsed, and several lost close friends or family members. While
many of my patients spent weeks processing their loss and trauma, some of
those who were most affected by the attacks chose not to discuss their
experiences in therapy at all. For example, one young man who was injured
by falling debris clearly stated he preferred not to think about what happened
to him that day ever again.
Although many of us believe it is essential to talk about traumatic events
after they occur in order to minimize the risk of psychological complications,

such is not the case. Indeed, a wave of recent research has demonstrated that
many of our most cherished notions about coping with loss and trauma—
well-known theories such as the five stages of grief (denial, anger,
bargaining, depression, and acceptance) and common wisdoms such as the
importance of expressing our feelings and the danger of keeping them bottled
up—are largely incorrect.
For example, a technique called critical incident stress debriefing (CISD)
is used by both the military and the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA). The technique requires people who experience traumatic events to
discuss them in great detail as soon after the events as possible, under the
assumption that expressing what happened and how they feel about it should
minimize the incidence of post-traumatic stress disorder. However, we now
know much more about how memories (including traumatic ones) are
actually formed in our brain. Specifically, the mere act of recalling an event
changes our actual memory of it in minor ways. When we recall traumatic
experiences while we’re still flooded with intense emotion, we are
inadvertently cementing the link between the memory and our intense
emotional reactions to it. By doing so we are making it even more likely the
memory will continue to evoke intense emotions going forward. As a result,
we risk getting vivid flashbacks and making the traumatic memories
themselves even more psychologically central and emotionally impactful
than they otherwise would be.
However, that is not to say we should try to repress such memories or that
we should refuse to discuss them. Indeed, most experts now believe there is
no “right” way to cope with the aftermath of loss and trauma. The best each
of us can do is to deal with such experiences exactly as our proclivities,
personality, and worldview dictate. If we feel the need to talk, we should,
and if we don’t feel the need to share our thoughts and feelings with others
we should not push ourselves to do so. For example, because my patient who
was hit by falling debris on September 11 felt such a strong reluctance to
think about the events, choosing not to discuss them was the correct course
of action for him. Indeed, there is evidence to suggest that those who find it
less pressing to discuss traumatic experiences might benefit from their
natural tendency to avoid talking about their thoughts and feelings.
One online study began following over two thousand people in, as it
happened, August 2001. Once the tragedies of September 11 occurred, the

researchers realized they had a huge subject pool at their disposal. They
decided to give the study participants the option of posting their feelings and
thoughts about the events on the study website should they wish to do so.
Three-quarters of the subjects chose to share their thoughts and feelings and
one-quarter did not. The researchers continued to follow the subjects for two
years and were able to examine their emotional well-being over time. For
people geographically closest to the attacks, those who chose not to express
their emotions had fewer symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder two
years later than people who had shared their thoughts and feelings online.
Furthermore, the more people wrote (i.e., the longer their posts), the poorer
they fared two years later.
These results by no means suggest we should avoid discussing our feelings
if we feel the need to do so. The best course of action we can take in the
aftermath of tragic events is to do exactly as our feelings dictate. Those who
feel the need to share their thoughts and feelings with others should do so,
and those who feel the need to remove themselves from such discussions
should avoid them as best they can.
Following our natural inclinations might be advisable, but it can also be
challenging at times. Those of us who prefer to discuss our feelings and
experiences might find it difficult to do so if we lack sources of social
support, while those who prefer not to discuss their feelings might find it
equally difficult if they find themselves surrounded by vivid reminders. It
was practically impossible for those affected by the events of September 11
to avoid thinking about their experiences, as reminders of the tragedy were
everywhere. For months one could not step into the streets of Manhattan
without seeing evidence of the attacks: the ruined buildings, the dust, the
stench of burning materials, and the pictures of missing loved ones that were
plastered on every wall, bus stop, and street sign along with heart-wrenching
pleas for information about their whereabouts.
My patient avoided these reminders as best he could at the time, by
burying his head in a magazine when he was on the subway, stepping away
from water-cooler conversations when he was at work, and letting his close
friends and family members know they should refrain from discussing the
topic in his presence. Indeed, it is always best to let those around us know
whether we wish to discuss tragic events or avoid such conversations so they
know how best to conduct themselves around us.

For those who feel inclined to share thoughts and feelings with others,
doing so can help us come to terms with the realities of our loss or trauma.
Indeed, many religious rituals around grieving have exactly such a purpose
in mind. For example, both Jewish shivahs and Irish wakes involve the
gathering of friends and family to provide an outlet for the bereaved to
express their feelings, thoughts, and memories while surrounded by sources
of social and emotional support (not to mention copious quantities of food
and alcohol).
When sources of social support are lacking or if we prefer to do so, we can
also write about our experiences or compose letters to the people we’ve lost.
Expressing thoughts and feelings we had not been able to share with the
person before they died can give us comfort and even provide a measure of
closure.
Regardless of how we choose to soothe our emotional pain in the
immediate aftermath of loss or trauma, the most effective treatment—and
one that is available to all of us—is time.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: SOOTHE YOUR EMOTIONAL
PAIN YOUR WAY
Dosage: Administer as soon after the events as possible. Make sure to
communicate your preferences with regard to discussing your feelings and
experiences to those around you.

Effective for: Managing and reducing emotional pain.

Treatment B: Recover Lost Aspects of Your “Self”
When Maxine lost her beloved husband, Kurt, to brain cancer, she lost
substantial parts of herself as well. Her life after Kurt died was completely
different from what it had been when he was alive. She and Kurt had been
extremely active and enjoyed a thriving social circle, frequent camping and
hiking trips, and countless evenings spent with good friends. But Maxine
stopped participating in all such events after Kurt died and, as a result, she
lost touch with the friends and the activities that had been a substantial part
of her life.

Many of us are inclined to avoid people, places, or activities associated
with the person we lost or with the traumatic events we faced in the first
weeks and months after such events occur. But maintaining such avoidance
for extended periods of time is problematic when doing so involves cutting
out significant aspects of our lives. Maxine lost touch with many of the very
experiences and relationships that had defined her, and consequently lost
touch with important parts of herself. Relinquishing so many meaningful
roles and functions altered her very sense of identity and these losses were
never replaced. She found no new interests and passions to fulfill her and she
made few new friends. The void her husband’s death left in her life was still
as large as it had been almost ten years earlier.
Maxine desperately needed to fill these gaps either by going back to
previous activities or relationships or by finding new ones. Many of us face
similar challenges. We go through our lives feeling empty and incomplete
even years after the tragic experiences that changed us.

EXERCISE TO RECOVER LOST ASPECTS OF YOUR “SELF”
The following writing exercise will help you identify aspects of yourself you
might have lost by finding new ways to express these missing parts of your
identity and identifying new ways to recover meaningful roles you might
have forsaken. I’ve included Maxine’s responses to each of the questions for
illustration purposes.
Caution: If the events are still fresh and the emotional distress you feel is
still extreme, do not push yourself to complete this exercise unless you feel
psychologically ready to do so.
1. List your qualities, characteristics, and abilities that you valued in yourself
or that others valued about you before the events occurred (aim for at least
ten items).
Maxine’s list included the following: loyal, passionate, adventurous, curious,
intelligent, leader, outdoors lover, expert camper, bonfire storyteller,
compassionate, considerate, supportive, enthusiastic, loving, caring, and
communicative.
1. Which of the above items feel most disconnected from your life today or
tend to be expressed less today than they had been previously?

Maxine indicated the following: adventurous, leader, outdoors lover, expert
camper, storyteller, considerate, enthusiastic, loving, and caring. (Note that
Maxine’s list clustered around two aspects that had been central to her life
before her husband died: her love of camping and the outdoors, and her close
bond with the circle of friends who shared her passions.)
1. For each quality you listed, write a brief paragraph describing why you feel
disconnected from the attribute in question or why the quality is no longer
expressed as extensively as it had been previously.
For example, Maxine wrote the following about why she rarely felt
“adventurous”: “I never thought of myself as a lone adventurer. For me,
adventure was always about sharing new experiences with Kurt. What made
it exciting was having the adventure together. Having them without him
doesn’t seem worthwhile and it even seems sad.”
1. For each quality you listed, write a brief paragraph describing possible
people, activities, or outlets you could pursue that would allow you to
express the quality in a more substantial way than you are able to do
currently.
When I asked Maxine to do this she struggled. She simply couldn’t figure
out how she might express her adventurous spirit without Kurt there to share
the experience. “You think I should reconnect to my spirit of adventure by
going on the safari, don’t you?” she said, quickly adding, “But I can’t, I
really can’t!”
“Actually, that’s not what I was thinking at all,” I responded. “I believe in
taking small steps and a safari is hardly a small step. Actually, what caught
my attention about your lists was that you stated adventures were
experiences to be shared with Kurt. But it wasn’t just Kurt. You were both
part of a larger group of people who shared the same interests and passions,
people with whom you might still share adventures, even if small ones. So
here’s what I was thinking,” I said. “Which of your old camping friends
would be someone you could see yourself going on a short hike with?”
Maxine exhaled noticeably. She had been so convinced I was going to press
her to go on a safari, she was happily willing to discuss taking a short hike
with one of her old friends.
As another example, Grant had been very athletic and loved basketball
before losing both his legs in a car accident. I pointed out that basketball was

an extremely popular wheelchair sport and suggested he get information
about local amateur leagues he could join.
1. Rank the items from the previous question according to which of them
seem both doable and emotionally manageable.
2. Set yourself the goal of working through the list as best you can and at
whatever pace seems most comfortable (taking into account that taking
action on each of the items is likely to cause at least some emotional
discomfort at first). By working through the items on your list you will
begin to reconnect to meaningful and valuable aspects of yourself and your
personality, and by doing so, move forward.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: RECOVER LOST ASPECTS OF
YOUR SELF
Dosage: Administer once you have returned to normal functioning (e.g.,
within the home, at work, or in school).

Effective for: Restoring important aspects of one’s identity and rebuilding
disrupted relationships.

Secondary benefits: Reduces emotional pain.

Treatment C: Find Meaning in Tragedy
Since Viktor Frankl wrote Man’s Search for Meaning, it has been accepted
that finding meaning in loss and trauma is essential for coping effectively
with such experiences, and thousands of studies have confirmed these
assumptions. Finding meaning was a crucial factor in recovery from every
kind of loss and trauma studied, from those with spinal cord injuries to
bereaved parents of young children, from victims of violence and abuse to
frontline veterans of wars. To recover from our tragic experience we need to
set our bones correctly and put the pieces of our lives back together in ways
that lend meaning and significance to the events by weaving our experiences
into the larger fabric of our life stories.

But the question that arises for many of us is how to do so. We might be
aware that people with similar experiences reached conclusions such as “I
came to accept that it was God’s will,” “I realized I could help others who
went through what I went through,” or “I figured out what mattered to me
and made big changes,” but that doesn’t tell us how these people reached
their insights or how we might go about attaining our own epiphanies.
Scientists who examined how people go about finding meaning in loss and
trauma realized the process includes two distinct phases, sense making and
benefit finding. Sense making refers to our ability to fit the events into our
existing framework of assumptions and beliefs about the world so they
become more comprehensible to us. We are usually able to begin making
sense of tragic events within six months of experiencing them (although
completing the process of sense making can sometimes take months and even
years). Once we do, we are likely to have far better emotional and
psychological recoveries.
Benefit finding refers to our ability to wrestle whatever silver linings we
can from our experiences. We might gain a greater appreciation of life and of
our own strength and resilience, we might realign our priorities and identify
new purpose, and we might recognize new paths that have opened before us
as a result of our new realities. Benefit finding occurs only in later stages of
our recovery, as it is not something most of us can or should do when still in
the grips of severe emotional pain. That said, once sufficient time has passed,
people who are able to identify benefits in their loss or trauma tend to
display greater emotional and psychological well-being than those who are
unable to do so.

How to Find Meaning in Tragedy
Once of the most common ways in which people derive meaning from tragic
events is by taking action in ways that are directly related to the loss or
trauma they sustained. Family members of someone who died of a rare
disease might start a foundation to increase awareness of the illness that took
their loved one. A survivor of sexual or physical assault might decide to
speak out and educate others about how to avoid such experiences or how to
cope with them if they occur. Veterans who’ve lost a limb in war often
volunteer to help recently wounded soldiers adjust to their injuries and
support them through their long process of rehabilitation. Many people who

lost loved ones in the attacks of September 11, 2001, became involved in
planning memorial sites in New York; Washington, DC; and Pennsylvania.
Of course, not every loss affords us these options, nor are they appropriate
for everyone.
The following exercises will help us identify new avenues of thinking that
could make our individual explorations more productive. Two exercises
facilitate sense making. The first should be completed only once we’ve
begun to recover from the initial assault of emotional pain. The second
should be applied slightly later, when we are emotionally able to contemplate
potentially painful “what-if” scenarios. The third exercise facilitates benefit
finding and should only be considered once we feel substantially recovered
and stronger emotionally. If any of the following exercises are too painful to
complete, please refer to the section at the end of the chapter that discusses
when to seek the advice of a mental health professional.

Make Sense of Tragic Events by Asking Why, Not How
We often struggle to accept the basic reality of tragic events when they first
occur and we replay how things happened over and over again in our minds.
For example, Maxine frequently replayed memories of her last conversation
with Kurt. Natural as it is to do so, when such ruminations persist, they
become unproductive and serve only to reactivate our emotional pain. Going
over how things happened and replaying similar scenes tends to add no new
insights and does not help us make sense of the events. But tweaking one
important aspect of these ruminative thoughts could make them more
conducive to attaining new insights and to fostering sense making.
Specifically, numerous studies demonstrate that asking ourselves why
events happened as opposed to how they happened is sufficient to trigger a
qualitatively different and more productive thought process. Difficult as it is
to answer such questions, by asking why instead of how we widen the scope
of our thinking and of our associations and are forced to consider the larger
existential, spiritual, or philosophical implications of the events. Such
bigger-picture thought processes are more likely to help us find meaning in
the events in time, and to reach a greater measure of internal peace as a
result.
Almost ten years after losing her husband, Maxine never asked herself the

big questions about why Kurt died and whether she could derive any
meaning or purpose from losing him. In fact, such questions were so foreign
to Maxine’s way of thinking that she seemed momentarily confused and
disoriented when I first asked them. However, once she was able to begin
giving thought to the question of why Kurt died she found that she spent
much less time replaying the events of his last weeks and months. For
Maxine, asking why opened the door to fresh and meaningful thought
processes that helped her move forward in her mourning after being stalled
for many years.

Make Sense of Tragic Events by Asking What Might Have Been
Another feature of the obsessive thoughts we experience in early stages of
loss or trauma is they are often characterized by fantasies about alternate
outcomes. We ponder such questions as “What if the person who died in an
accident had taken a different route?” “What if the cancer had been found
earlier?” or “What if our attacker had chosen a different victim?” Some of us
might feel that pursuing thoughts of “what might have been” can only focus
us on the randomness of the events and thus make it more difficult for us to
accept what is. But studies have found the opposite. Rather than eliciting a
sense of randomness, thoughts that consider alternatives to the factual
realities we’ve experienced (known as counterfactuals) can help us feel like
the events were predestined and meant to be, thereby lending them greater
meaning.
Much like asking why instead of how, counterfactual thoughts force us to
think more abstractly, to make connections between different parts of our
lives, to utilize our analytic abilities, and to see the bigger picture. All of
these are essential aspects of the meaning-making process. Such exercises
can help us break out of rigid perspectives that limit our ability to consider
the larger context of our lives so we can arrive at fresh comprehensions and
new perspectives.
Our natural tendency is to employ counterfactual thoughts to explore how
we might have avoided the loss or trauma, but we can also direct our
thoughts to how things could have been worse. Some experts believe the best
way to extract meaning from tragic events (again, once we’ve recovered
sufficiently) is to combine both types of counterfactual thinking and consider

both what our lives would have been like had the events not happened and
the ways in which things could have been worse.

THOUGHT EXERCISE: “WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN”
Caution: Readers should be advised that counterfactual thought experiments
can be emotionally painful. Review the exercise and complete it only if you
feel emotionally ready to do so. Further, those who do not believe in fate or
predestination might not benefit from this exercise as much as those who do,
and therefore they should not complete it if they feel that doing so will be
either unhelpful or too emotionally distressing. For those who feel ready, it is
best to complete this exercise in one sitting. Written responses are strongly
recommended.
1. How would your life be different today if the events had not happened?
2. In what ways could the outcome of the events have been even worse than
they were?
3. What factors prevented these worse outcomes from occurring?
4. How grateful are you that these worse outcomes did not occur?
Once you’ve completed this exercise, give yourself time to recover and to
absorb any thoughts, insights, or fresh perspectives it might have evoked (at
least a day or more) before moving on to the benefit-finding exercise. You
may also choose to wait weeks or months or to skip the benefit-finding
exercise entirely if you feel unready or unable to complete it.

How to Identify Benefits in Loss
Finding benefit in loss and trauma once enough time has passed is an
important way to ascribe meaning and significance to the events so we can
put them in their place and move on with our lives. Although it can take time
to identify any such “silver linings,” doing so can open doors to paths and
opportunities that can become sources of both meaning and life satisfaction
later on. Helping others who’ve had similar experiences; creating awareness
about diseases, societal problems, or other dangers; starting foundations in
memory of those we’ve lost; writing about the events and creating art and
performances about them; and becoming para-athletes are all examples of
ways in which people have extracted benefit and purpose from tragic events.

While identifying potential pathways for deriving benefit from tragedy can
have a positive impact on our recovery it is the real-world application of
these benefits that does our emotional and psychological recovery most
good. Therefore, we need to find ways to put any benefits we identify into
action. For example, we might come away from a tragedy with a greater
appreciation of our family, but if we don’t take action based on these
insights, the benefit we derive from our new perspective will be limited.
However, if we make changes that allow us to spend more time with family
members or increase the quality of the time we already do spend with them,
we are much more likely to have truly gained from our loss and reap the
psychological blessings of doing so.

EXERCISE TO IDENTIFY POSSIBLE BENEFITS
When completing the following exercise, make sure you have the time and
space to relax and let your thoughts explore various possibilities without
feeling rushed or pressured.
Imagine yourself ten years in the future. You have been able to achieve
something meaningful and significant (not necessarily “Nobel Prize worthy”
but meaningful to you). You have a quiet moment to look back and reflect
about your journey and how it has led you to this current moment in (future)
time. Complete the following sentences.
1. I never imagined back then that such tragic events would lead me to:
2. What I did was significant and very meaningful to me because:
3. The first step of my journey toward the achievement was when I:
4. My achievement was possible because I changed my priorities such that:
5. Changing my priorities led me to make the following changes in my life:
6. Along the way I realized my purpose in life is:

TREATMENT SUMMARY: FIND MEANING IN TRAGEDY
Dosage: Review the treatment and administer it only when you feel you
can manage the emotional pain or discomfort it might evoke.

Effective for: Reducing emotional pain, recovering lost aspects of our

identity, and reconstructing damaged belief systems.

Secondary benefits: Restores and rebuilds damaged or neglected
relationships.

When to Consult a Mental Health Professional
When the loss or trauma we’ve sustained is significant or when it impacts
our lives in extreme or fundamental ways, we should always seek the counsel
of a mental health professional. If you think you might be experiencing
symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, such as intrusive flashbacks,
nightmares, emotional numbness, or jumpiness and agitation, seek the
counsel of a trained mental health professional who specializes in trauma.
Further, if you’ve applied the treatments in this chapter but doing so has not
helped your emotional or mental state or you have not been able to make
changes to better your situation or resume your life fully and productively,
you should also seek the help of an experienced mental health professional,
preferably one who specializes in loss, trauma, or bereavement.
If at any point after tragic events occur you feel as though you are in too
much emotional pain and have thoughts of harming yourself or another
person in any way, you should seek immediate help from a mental health
professional or go to the nearest emergency room.

CHAPTER 4
GUILT
The Poison in Our System
Guilt is an extremely common feeling of emotional distress caused by the
belief that we’ve done something wrong or caused harm to another person.
We all fail to live up to our own standards from time to time and even the
best of us can act in ways that offend, insult, or hurt someone, inadvertently
or otherwise. How common are guilty feelings? Studies estimate that people
experience roughly two hours a day of mild guilt, five hours a week of
moderate guilt, and three and a half hours a month of severe guilt. In some
cases guilty feelings persist for years and even for decades.
The reason we don’t walk around feeling incapacitated by guilty feelings
is that we usually experience them for only short durations. Indeed, guilt’s
primary function is to signal to us we’ve done or are about to do something
that violates our personal standards (such as when we cheat on our diets, buy
something that wasn’t in our budget, or play video games instead of doing
work) or that causes direct or indirect harm to another person. We respond to
this signal by reevaluating our plan of action or apologizing to those we’ve
harmed and mending the situation as best we can, and our guilt typically
dissipates rather quickly thereafter.
Unpleasant as it is, guilt serves a crucial function in maintaining our
individual standards of behavior and in protecting our personal, familial, and
community relationships. When our spouse tears up in the middle of a heated
argument, guilt makes us soften and reach out. When we’re extremely busy
and stressed at work and realize we forgot our mother’s birthday, guilt
swoops in to nag at us until we drop what we’re doing and shoot her a highly
apologetic e-mail or phone call. And when our friend discovers we revealed
something he or she told us in confidence, guilt motivates us to offer a
heartfelt apology, a promise of future discretion, and maybe even a nice
dinner as compensation.
Guilt does so much to protect our most cherished relationships it
practically deserves its own superhero costume and cape. But before we

break out the spandex, we should consider that not everything guilt does is
psychologically beneficial. In the above examples, the harm we caused the
other person was mild and our efforts to apologize or atone for our errors
were successful. Therefore our guilty feelings ceased immediately or at least
decreased significantly as a result. Similarly, when we fail to live up to our
own standards, compensating for our wrongdoing and correcting our
behavior is usually sufficient to eliminate our guilt substantially if not
entirely.
But there are times when our guilty feelings outstay their welcome and
become literal squatters in our minds. While guilt can be heroic in small
doses, in larger ones, it becomes a psychological villain, poisoning both our
peace of mind and our most cherished relationships. And once the toxins of
unhealthy guilt are circulating in our systems, extracting the venom is no
easy task.

Unhealthy Guilt and Relationships
Although we feel guilty when we violate our personal standards, such guilt
rarely lingers. When we cheat on our diet, when we spend too much money,
or when we neglect our duties in some way, we might make efforts to
compensate for our actions, but we are rarely traumatized by them. No one
wakes up screaming in the middle of the night consumed with guilt about the
chocolate cheesecake they wolfed down last Christmas. When emotional
distress about violating our personal standards does linger, it usually
engenders feelings of regret rather than guilt.
Rather, unhealthy guilt occurs primarily in situations involving our
relationships—when there are implications for the welfare of others.
Unhealthy relational guilt typically manifests in three primary forms, all of
which inflict similar psychological wounds: unresolved guilt, which is the
most common and often the most damaging, survivor guilt, and separation
guilt (or the closely related disloyalty guilt).
Although there are innumerable offenses that can elicit relational guilt, one
of the main reasons our guilt might remain unresolved is that we’re much
less skilled at rendering effective apologies than we tend to realize. Another
is that even when our apologies are on point, the harm we caused the other
person might simply be too great for that person to forgive us for or the

person might want to forgive us but simply feels unable to do so (often a sign
our apology was ineffective after all). In some situations circumstances
might prevent us from being able to communicate an apology to the person at
all. In each of these scenarios, our guilt remains unresolved and unremitting
and can quickly become toxic.
Some forms of guilt occur without clear wrongdoing on our part.
Survivors of wars, accidents, illnesses, or other tragedies often find it
impossible to engage in their lives fully because doing so evokes images or
memories of those who perished. They might be consumed by questions
about why they survived while others did not. Or they might feel responsible
in some way even though there was nothing they could have done to prevent
the events from occurring. Many of those with severe cases of survivor guilt
also suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). As such, their
survivor guilt is merely a symptom of a more complex psychological
disorder and the treatments in this chapter would not be appropriate for them.
When survivor guilt is related to wars, accidents, and other traumatic events,
it is best to consult a mental health professional who is specifically trained in
treating PTSD.
Survivor guilt is often made worse by circumstance. We might have argued
with a sibling just before he was killed in a driving accident, forgotten to call
back a friend just before she committed suicide, or insulted a colleague
moments before he was fired. One of the most unfortunate examples of how
circumstances can induce survivor guilt involves Waylon Jennings, who was
a guitarist for Buddy Holly. Jennings had a seat on Holly’s plane the day it
crashed, killing all aboard, but he gave up his seat to J.P. Richardson (“the
Big Bopper”) and took the bus because Richardson was sick. If that wasn’t
enough to induce survivor guilt, the last exchange Jennings had with Holly
was when Holly teased Jennings for having to take the bus by saying, “Well,
I hope your ol’ bus freezes up!” Jennings retorted, “Well, I hope your ol’
plane crashes!” Jennings later became a star in his own right, but he was
forever haunted by incredible survivor guilt both by Richardson’s death and
even more so because of his parting words to Buddy Holly.
Fortunately, many of the situations that cause survivor guilt are far less
dramatic or tragic than Jennings’s. When we find ourselves more fortunate
than others, either because we’re doing exceptionally well or because they
are faring unusually poorly by comparison, our empathy and conscience can

combine to elicit an exaggerated sense of guilt. As a result we might
experience psychological disruptions in our lives despite no wrongdoing on
our part. For example, we might find it difficult to enjoy a promotion
because our friend and colleague had competed for the same position. We
might feel unable to celebrate our engagement to the person of our dreams
because our older sibling is still single and unhappy. Or we might have
trouble celebrating getting into our first choice of colleges because our best
friend did not.
What makes survivor guilt especially hard to purge is that there are no
actions for which we must atone, no relationship ruptures to mend, and no
outstanding apologies to be rendered. As such, our guilt serves no relational
purpose and its warning signals constitute nothing more than a deafening
false alarm that poisons our quality of life.
Separation guilt involves feeling guilty about moving forward and
pursuing our own life when doing so involves leaving others behind. We
might find it impossible to enjoy a night out with our spouse because we feel
guilty about leaving our children with a babysitter, even one with whom they
are familiar and comfortable. We might feel guilty about living far from our
aging parents, even when they are well cared for. Or we might feel guilty
about taking a job or studying overseas when we know how much our
families will miss us.
Disloyalty guilt arises when we feel such binding ties of loyalty to close
family members or friends that pursuing our own goals or making choices
that deviate from their norms and expectations makes us feel bad. We worry
that our families will perceive our choices as hurtful condemnations of their
own values and as betrayals of family loyalty. Such guilt is especially
common around themes of religious practices and sexual orientation. One
mother I worked with turned to her lesbian daughter who had just come out
(and had agreed to join her for the session) and cried, “How could you do
this to me?!” Her daughter responded by saying, “I’m not doing anything to
you! I just want to be happy!” and promptly burst into tears while mouthing
to her mother, “I’m so sorry. I’m so sorry.”
Family members often feel betrayed in such situations and, unfortunately,
they often convey their feelings to us in no uncertain terms. Of course, many
adult children feel just as betrayed by their parents’ lack of support and
empathy, but guilt usually falls far more heavily on their shoulders than it

does on those of their parents or other family and community members.
While the consequences to our relationships should obviously be
addressed in such situations, what makes our guilt maladaptive is that it
arises in response to an otherwise healthy desire to express our autonomy, to
live our own lives, to make our own choices and tend to our own emotional
and psychological needs.
Regardless of whether our unhealthy guilt results from wrongdoing on our
part or not, the more excessive it is or the longer it lingers, the more toxic its
effects become and the greater the wounds it can inflict on our mental health.

The Psychological Wounds Guilt Inflicts
Excessive unhealthy guilt causes two types of psychological wounds, each of
which can be poisonous to our quality of life. The first involves the impact
guilt has on our individual functioning and happiness. In addition to creating
paralyzing emotional distress, guilt seriously hampers our ability to focus
adequate attention on our own needs and obligations, and it often causes us
to resort to blatant self-punishment. The second is that it wreaks havoc on
our relationships. The effects of excessive or unresolved guilt impair our
communication with the person we’ve harmed and limit our ability to relate
to him or her in an authentic manner; in addition, its toxic effects often ripple
outward and create tensions and allegiances that ensnare entire families,
social circles, and even communities.
The reason it is urgent to treat unresolved or excessive guilt is that such
feelings often intensify and devolve into remorse and shame. Once that
happens, we begin to condemn not just our actions but our entire selves,
leading to self-loathing, low self-esteem, and depression. In order to treat
these two wounds successfully we will need a clear understanding of the
impact they have on our lives and the damage they inflict on our
relationships. Let’s examine them in greater detail.

1. Self-Condemnation: How Guilt Plays Whac-A-Mole with Our
Joy and Happiness
Guilty feelings come in a range of severities. On the lighter side, our guilt
can manifest as an annoying pest that constantly nags at us and tugs at our

shirtsleeves. It can distract us as we labor to attend to our obligations and
slow us down as we go about the daily business of our lives. In its more
severe form guilt can consume us, paralyze us, and become the central
organizing theme of our very existence.
Yoshi, a college student, was only months away from graduating when he
came to see me for psychotherapy during his spring break. His parents, both
physicians, had immigrated to the United States from Japan in their early
thirties, then struggled to find jobs as clinicians and took research positions
instead. “My father says the happiest day of his life was when I was accepted
into an Ivy League school with one of the best premed programs in the
country,” Yoshi explained. “They expected me to go straight to Harvard
Medical School and eventually open a successful medical practice, so I could
fulfill the dream they were denied.”
The pressure his parents’ expectations were putting on Yoshi was
enormous, but as he continued his story I realized he was far beyond stressed
—he looked absolutely haunted.
“I hated premed from the first class I took,” he continued. “I kept at it for
the entire first year and I did well, but I was miserable. Premed wasn’t for
me. Medical school isn’t for me. So I switched majors. Only I didn’t know
how to tell them without breaking their hearts. They’ve sacrificed so much
for me, for my education, I just couldn’t ... I’ve been lying to them ever
since. But I graduate in a few months and then ... they’ll know!” Yoshi
covered his face with his hands. “I feel so guilty I could throw up. I keep
imagining their faces when they find out.” Yoshi began sobbing. He was
unable to speak for several minutes. “They’ve worked so hard to pay for my
schooling. I could have gone to a state school and saved them so much
money. They think I’ll be hearing from Harvard any day now. They’re going
to be crushed, just crushed!” Yoshi broke into a fresh round of sobs. “I don’t
know what to do! I can’t concentrate, I can’t focus, I can’t study ... it’s all I
can think about!”
After managing his guilt for three years, Yoshi could no longer keep it at
bay. His guilty feelings now consumed him, screamed at him, nagged at him,
and made it impossible for him to ignore their presence any longer. They
hampered his ability to concentrate, to focus, to think clearly, and to move
forward in his studies.
Guilt makes many of us experience mental and intellectual disruptions that

are so significant we might struggle to meet our basic obligations and to
function at work or in school. Until we take steps to address the cause of our
guilt or minimize its impact, we will continue to remain at its mercy.
Unfortunately, unhealthy guilt doesn’t only make us feel bad, it prevents
us from feeling good as well. In one study involving regular college students
(i.e., not ones preselected for guilt issues), scientists flashed words
associated with guilt, such as “blameworthy,” “culpable,” and “guilt-ridden,”
on a screen at high speed such that the participants did not perceive the
words consciously but were impacted by them nonetheless—a process called
“priming.” A second group of people was primed with words associated with
sadness, and a third (control) group was primed with neutral words.
Participants were then asked to indicate how they might spend a fifty-dollar
coupon. While subjects in the neutral and sadness groups allocated most of
their funds to things such as music and movies, subjects who were primed
with guilt-related words chose far less indulgent items such as school
supplies.
This experiment and others like it serve as testaments to guilt’s significant
party-pooping powers, as even subliminal exposure to guilt-related words
was sufficient to function as a killjoy for people who weren’t even feeling
guilty at the time. Certainly when we are in the throes of unrelenting or
excessive guilt it is extremely difficult for us to enjoy our lives in any
substantial way. Things that used to bring us pleasure, joy, or excitement lose
their appeal, not because we no longer enjoy them, but because we no longer
permit ourselves to do so.
This is especially problematic for people who suffer from various forms of
survivor guilt. For example, parents whose children are victims of accidents
or chronic illness, children (and even grandchildren) of Holocaust survivors,
survivors of other atrocities, and spouses who lose their partners often feel
guilty at the very thought of having fun or indulging themselves in any way.
Such extended and severe guilt serves no productive purpose other than to
unnecessarily diminish our own quality of life.

A Fight Club of One
Another toxic effect of excessive guilt is that we might try to relieve our
emotional distress by punishing ourselves for our wrongdoings (consciously

or unconsciously) with self-sabotaging or self-destructive behavior. Some of
us even resort to punishing ourselves physically. Self-flagellation has a long
and particularly stomach-turning history as a form of atonement and was
especially popular during outbreaks of bubonic plague in thirteenth-and
fourteenth-century Europe. People believed that publically whipping
themselves with irons or flaying their own flesh would cleanse them from
sins and ward off the Black Death. As civilization advanced, so have our
methods of self-punishment, as evidenced by the dearth of people who whip
themselves into a bloody mess in public and the abundance of folks who
bang their heads against a wall in private.
Head bangers aside, far more of us resort to self-punishment than we
might realize. In one study, people who were made to feel guilty by
depriving a fellow subject of lottery tickets were willing to give themselves
highly uncomfortable electrical shocks, especially when they found
themselves in the presence of their “victim.” In other studies, subjects who
were made to feel guilty were willing to keep their hands submerged in
freezing water for painful periods of time (and much longer ones than
nonguilty subjects). What makes such findings remarkable is that the
participants weren’t warding off the plague—they just felt bad about a fellow
student missing out on a few lottery tickets!
Seeking self-punishment when we feel responsible for harming someone
whom we are unable to compensate for our actions is known as the Dobby
effect (so named after the self-punishing house-elf in the Harry Potter series).
The reason we nonmagical creatures resort to such measures, and the reason
we might even do so publicly, is that such actions represent a clear signal of
remorse. By making others aware of our emotional distress, we redistribute
the emotional (or physical) pain our “victims” felt, even the score with them,
and hopefully restore our standing in our social circle, family, or community.

2. Blocked Relationships: How Guilt Poisons Arteries of Healthy
Communication
Significant guilt poisons the arteries of authentic communication and
connection between us and those we’ve harmed (or, in the case of guilt trips,
those who perceive themselves to have been harmed by us whether they were
or not). Even if we don’t realize it, unresolved guilt impacts our behavior
around the other person, and it usually affects how that person behaves

around us as well. In many cases, it also embroils others in our social or
family circles, such that the natural flow of authentic communication
between all the affected people quickly becomes poisoned and our
relationships become extremely strained. The ongoing toxicity of our
unresolved guilt in such situations can damage our relationships even more
substantially than our original offense did.
We often experience guilt in waves and when it comes to our relationships,
the waves are at their highest when we interact with the offended person. In
such moments, our guilt can spike so dramatically that it feels like being hit
in the face in dodgeball. Understandably, our natural inclination is often to
duck these painful encounters whenever we can. In order to minimize any
chances of injuring the person further, we avoid any mention of the guiltinducing incident itself, when interacting with that person and with other
family members. We steer clear of any related topics that might segue into
the incident, a list that tends to grow as time goes on. We might also avoid
people or places that remind us of our wrongdoing, and eventually we begin
making efforts to avoid the person altogether.
While such strategies represent ineffective solutions at best, they are all
but impossible when the person we’ve harmed is our spouse. Blake, a stayat-home dad, and Judy, a pharmaceuticals sales representative, initially came
to couples therapy to deal with parenting issues. They had three children, two
of whom were diagnosed with attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder
and all three of whom failed to respond to any efforts the parents made to set
limits. However, their parenting differences were swiftly pushed aside when
Blake discovered a text message indicating Judy might have had an affair
with a coworker the previous year. He confronted her about it in our next
session. Judy was stunned by Blake’s ambush but she confessed to the affair
right away. “It was a one-time thing and I’ve regretted it ever since,” she
said. “We had a drink after work and it just happened. But it didn’t mean
anything! It was just a stupid mistake, a terribly stupid mistake.”
Blake, who had hoped Judy would be able to offer a compelling
explanation for the text message, was absolutely shattered. “You slept with
another man,” he mumbled, shaking his head in disbelief. “You slept with
another man....”
Judy’s face was a mask of guilt and anguish. “I’m sorry, Blake! I truly am!
But I promise you it meant nothing. It was a mistake, that’s all. You have to

believe me!”
Judy was incredibly relieved when Blake informed her that he’d decided to
stay in the marriage. However, that did not mean he forgave her. In fact,
Blake continued to feel so wounded he struggled to think of anything else.
Every time Judy looked at him, she saw the terrible hurt in his eyes and she
felt incredibly guilty because of it. As the weeks went by, they began to fall
back into their normal patterns and routines, but Blake’s pain lingered on and
so did Judy’s guilt. Judy’s job in sales required her to be energetic and
positive and she was able to adopt that mind-set when she was at work. But
at home she felt oppressed by her guilt. She began working longer hours
(making sure to call Blake every thirty minutes to reassure him she was
legitimately in her office). She found excuses to avoid family engagements,
both with his and with her own family, and she became less involved in the
kids’ extracurricular activities.
I decided to meet with Judy privately to discuss her increasing
disengagement. “It’s not just your guilt that you’re avoiding,” I pointed out,
“it’s your entire marriage.” Judy nodded silently. But her guilt had become so
overwhelming she simply wasn’t sure whether she could tolerate it much
longer. She was desperate to receive forgiveness from Blake and he in turn
was desperate to forgive her and move on—but he simply couldn’t. The
cycle of hurt, guilt, and avoidance that played out between them devastated
their ability to communicate authentically with one another and presented an
even greater threat to their marriage than her affair had. When we play
dodgeball with our guilt, we rarely win.

Tripping on Guilt Trips
Guilt trips almost always take place in close relationships and their most
common theme is one of interpersonal neglect. “I could be lying here dead
and you’d never know it because you never call,” “If you get that tattoo it’ll
break your mother’s heart!” and “Your father’s been a wreck since your
argument with him last week!” are common yet benign examples of everyday
guilt trips that are the bread and butter of many family communications. The
main reason we seek to induce guilt in others is to influence their decisions
and behavior. But guilt trips have a boomerang effect we rarely consider in
that, along with guilt, they also induce resentment.

In one survey, 33 percent of people indicated they felt resentful toward
those who make them feel guilty while only 2 percent of guilt inducers
mentioned resentment as a potential consequence of their guilt-inducing
efforts. Indeed, few guilt trippers are aware of the self-defeating
consequences of their actions. When we are the recipients of guilt trips we
might respond to a person’s charges of neglect by engaging with them, but
the resentment we typically feel by doing so is likely to motivate us to avoid
them even more going forward. Mild as the poisonous effects of most guilt
trips are, over the long term, their toxicity can build and cause our
interactions and communication to become superficial and perfunctory, and
the quality of our relationships to diminish.

How Guilt Poisons Entire Families
When our transgression is significant or when the person we harmed remains
unforgiving, it doesn’t take much for the poisonous effects of our guilt and
the condemnation of the person we hurt to spread to other members of our
family or social circle. All it takes is for one person to take sides and invoke
unspoken expectations of loyalty in doing so, and a divide is quickly
established. Other family members then quickly line up on either side of the
rift, poisoning arteries of healthy communication even further and affecting
everyone to one degree or another. Many a multigenerational family feud
was birthed in just this way.
The most fertile grounds upon which these toxic family dynamics play out
are family events and religious holidays. Large gatherings create perfect
stages upon which to revive a family’s “greatest hits” of past wrongdoings.
Of course, aside from inducing powerful guilt in those who committed the
transgressions it creates tensions and divisiveness that can mar even the bestplanned and most festive events.
Antonia, a twenty-year-old college student, was the third oldest of twelve
siblings, ten of whom were girls. By Antonia’s own admission, she, of all the
siblings, had the most tumultuous relationship with their mother. “I’m from
an Italian family,” she explained in our first session. “Very Italian, you
know? I always give my mother respect but I argue with her too. Anyway,
things are really bad between us now and I have to do something.” I nodded
sympathetically, encouraging Antonia to continue. “I know this sounds

terrible and everything,” she said, “but the reason everyone is so upset is ... I
mean, what happened was I ... ran her over with the car.”
My eyebrows shot up so hard I thought my forehead would “ding.”
“I mean her foot!” Antonia hastily clarified. “I ran over her foot with the
car! And it was a mistake. A mistake!”
Antonia had been visiting her parents when she and her mother had one of
their “scream-fests.” Antonia decided to leave. She was about to pull out of
the driveway when her mother ran out because, in Antonia’s words, she “still
had more scream left in her.” Apparently Antonia’s mother proceeded to
deplete her reserves of “scream” by yelling at Antonia for disrespecting her
and walking away in the middle of an argument. It seems her mother
delivered her tirade so loudly and with such profanity, neighbors came
outside to watch. “I’ve never seen her so furious,” Antonia recalled. “There
was spit all over the car window. I mean saliva!”
Antonia, no slouch in the yelling department herself, yelled at her mother
to move away from the car. “My mom stood back but she looked scary mad.
It really shook me up. She made me so crazy, I forgot to straighten the wheel
and didn’t realize it was turned.” Antonia swallowed hard. “I pressed on the
gas and before I could hit the brake, I drove right over her foot.” Her lower
lip began to tremble. “I thought I would die. Die! I jumped out and saw my
mother clutching her left foot and screaming. I almost had a heart attack
when I realized I must have driven over it. She had bunion surgery on that
same foot just last year! I was, like, ‘Ma, I’m sorry! I didn’t realize the wheel
was turned! I’m sorry!’ But she didn’t even look at me. She just moaned in
pain.”
Antonia wanted to drive her mother straight to the emergency room, but
her mother refused and insisted Antonia’s older sister drive her instead. “I
waited for them at home all night,” Antonia continued. “I felt so guilty I
could vomit. Vomit! Then my sister Maria comes up to me and tells me my
mother says I ran over her on purpose! Can you believe that? How could she
think that?!”
By the time Antonia’s mother got home, her sisters had already divided
into camps: those who believed she had run over her mother’s foot on
purpose and those who were horrified by the mere suggestion. Unfortunately,
her mother’s foot took months to heal, during which members of the
extended family were slowly recruited to one side or the other. All the while,

Antonia continued to visit her parents and communicate with her mother,
albeit somewhat minimally, such that on the surface things appeared normal.
But below the surface, the unspoken accusations and resentments and
Antonia’s guilty feelings were snowballing. By the time the family gathered
for Thanksgiving the tension was so thick, it ruined the holiday for everyone.
Antonia decided to seek my advice before their Christmas was ruined as
well.
Similar tensions and tests of loyalty are common in workplaces, among
friends, and in other social circles such as recreational sport teams. When our
guilt is substantial and unresolved, the poison that impairs healthy
communication and creates stress between ourselves and another person can
easily expand and become toxic for the entire group.

How to Treat the Psychological Wounds Guilt Inflicts
Guilt usually serves an important function by alerting us to when we might
have harmed another person or when any actions we’re considering might do
so. Once we modify our plan of action or atone for our transgressions, either
by apologizing or in some other way, our guilt subsides. Therefore, we do
not need to apply emotional first aid treatments in every situation. However,
if our offense is serious or if we’ve already made significant efforts to
apologize to the person we harmed or to atone for our actions in other ways
and our guilt remains excessive, or if we suffer from substantial survivor
guilt, or separation and disloyalty guilt, emotional first aid is indeed
necessary. Let’s open our medical cabinet and review our treatment options.

General Treatment Guidelines
The most effective way to treat unresolved guilt is to eliminate it at the
source by repairing our relationship with the person we’ve harmed. Mending
the rupture and garnering the person’s authentic forgiveness will cause our
guilt to diminish significantly, and most likely dissolve completely, soon
thereafter. Treatment A (rendering effective apologies) focuses on how to
repair damaged relationships by crafting psychologically effective apologies
that can detoxify any ill will the other person still harbors and promote
relationship repair.

Treatment B (self-forgiveness) focuses on situations in which the
circumstances prevent a direct apology to be issued or ones in which it is
impossible to repair the relationship for other reasons, and provides other
ways to alleviate guilt, and reduce self-condemnation and self-punishment.
Treatment B is not as effective as Treatment A in removing the venom that is
at the root of excessive guilt but it does provide a form of “psychological
antitoxin” that can deliver much-needed emotional relief. Treatment C
(reengaging in life) is focused on survivor and separation and disloyalty guilt
(in which there are no relationship ruptures to mend). At the end of the
chapter I discuss guidelines for when one should consult a mental health
professional.

Treatment A: Learn the Recipe for an Effective
Apology
In theory, the solution to toxic relational guilt is simple—you render an
authentic apology to the person you’ve harmed and, assuming your sincerity
shines through and your transgression was not too monumental, all will be
forgiven, especially with time. However, research demonstrates that in
practice, this simple transaction of apology and forgiveness goes awry far
more often than we might expect, regardless of the area of our lives in which
it occurs. Further complicating matters, both psychologically and
communication-wise, when our apologies are perceived as insincere they can
actually backfire and make a situation worse, spreading even more poison
into an already toxic interpersonal dynamic.
The reason this happens so often is that crafting apologies that are
effective enough to garner authentic forgiveness is far more complicated than
we realize. In fact, until recently, it was far more complicated than most
psychologists realized as well.
How is it possible that something as basic as an apology befuddles so
many of us? After all, most of us are taught to say “I’m sorry” as soon as we
can talk. Surely as adults we should be at least somewhat proficient at
offering effective apologies. Alas, we’re not. Although we’re taught when to
say “I’m sorry,” we’re never really taught how to say it, or at least how to
voice it effectively. This exact issue eluded psychologists for many years.
Hundreds of studies have investigated apologies and forgiveness but the vast

majority of them have examined only if and when an apology was rendered,
not how it was articulated nor what distinguished a successful apology from
an unsuccessful one. Fortunately, relationship experts and researchers have
finally begun to investigate the specific ingredients that make apologies
effective and more likely to elicit authentic forgiveness from the offended
party.

The Recipe for Communicating Effective Apologies
Most of us conceive of apologies as including three basic ingredients: (1) a
statement of regret for what happened; (2) a clear “I’m sorry” statement; and
(3) a request for forgiveness—all of which must be delivered with sincerity
(e.g., “Wow, I completely forgot about our date night! I feel really bad about
it and hope you can forgive me!” as opposed to “Oops! Was that tonight?”).
Although each of these ingredients might seem obvious, it is remarkable how
often we end up omitting one of them. When I point out such omissions to
my patients, they often respond as if I’m being petty by calling them on a
mere “technicality.” “Aw, come on!” they often say, “I’m apologizing, aren’t
I? The ‘I’m sorry’ part is implied!”
My response is usually to point out that flour is an implied ingredient
when we’re baking a cake, but if we forget to put it in, what we end up with
won’t look like cake and it won’t taste like cake either. The analogy is
important because if we want our apologies to be effective, we have to
follow a clear recipe, and the three items above are not the only ingredients
we need to include. Scientists have discovered three additional components
that also play a vital role in an apology’s effectiveness: validating the other
person’s feelings, offering atonement, and acknowledging we violated
expectations. Let’s look at these additional ingredients and then examine
which of the total of six apology components were present or lacking in the
apologies offered by Antonia, Judy, and Yoshi, and how their apologies fared
as a result.

Validate Their Feelings
We generally find it hard to forgive people who hurt, angered, or
disappointed us unless we believe they really “get” how they made us feel.
But if their apology demonstrates a clear understanding of the emotional pain

they caused us and if they take full responsibility for doing so, we feel
substantial emotional relief and have a much easier time letting go of our
resentment because we feel like our feelings have been validated.
Emotional validation is a powerful tool when used correctly, and a great
toxin remover when used in apologies. Consequently, we need to put
ourselves in the other person’s shoes and understand the specific
consequences of our actions, how the person was affected by them, and the
feelings they caused. Validating the person’s emotions by conveying we
“get” how he or she feels does not imply we meant for the person to feel that
way. Doing so merely acknowledges the person felt wronged, regardless of
our intentions.
The reason this ingredient is so often omitted from apologies is because
when we’ve caused someone harm, acknowledging how upset he or she
seems strikes us as a risky proposition. The idea of telling someone who’s
angry, frustrated, or horribly disappointed in us that he or she indeed should
feel angry, frustrated, or horribly disappointed seems akin to pouring fuel on
the fire. Consequently, our instinct is to avoid addressing the individual’s
emotional state entirely. Yet, counterintuitive as it might seem, when we
validate someone’s feelings accurately, something quite magical happens.
Rather than inciting further fury and pouring fuel on the fire, our message of
emotional validation actually douses the flame.
Emotional validation is something we all seek and crave far more than we
realize. One of the reasons so many of us feel compelled to discuss our
feelings with others when we feel upset, angry, frustrated, disappointed, or
hurt is that we hope to get things off our chest and ease our internal distress
by doing so. However, in order to feel true relief, we need them to “get it,” to
understand what happened to us and why we feel the way we do. We need
them to validate our feelings by conveying that understanding along with a
generous dollop of empathy. When we spill our guts to our friends we hope
they’ll say “Wow,” “Gosh,” and “That’s terrible!” We would find it
incredibly unsatisfying if their only response to our heart-wrenching tale was
to shrug and say, “Bummer.”

How to Offer Authentic Emotional Validation
There are five steps to offering authentic emotional validation. The most

important factor is accuracy. The more accurate we are when conveying our
understanding of the wronged person’s feelings, the more relationship poison
we remove by doing so.
1. Let the other person complete his or her narrative about what happened so
you have all the facts.
2. Convey your understanding of what happened to this person from his or
her perspective (whether you agree with that perspective or not and even if
that perspective is obviously skewed).
3. Convey your understanding of how the person felt as a result of what
happened (from his or her perspective).
4. Acknowledge that his or her feelings are reasonable (which, given that
person’s perspective, they are).
5. Convey empathy and remorse for the person’s emotional state.
For more detailed instructions on how to access our empathy and accurately
assess how another person feels, see the sections on perspective taking and
empathy in chapter 2.

Offer Compensation or Atonement
Although it might not always be relevant, necessary, or possible to do so,
making offers to compensate or atone for our actions in some way can be
extremely meaningful to the offended party, even if he or she turns down the
offers we make. By conveying our recognition that there is an imbalance in
the relationship and suggesting actions that can restore a sense of equity and
fairness, we communicate a much deeper level of regret and remorse, as well
as a strong motivation to repair the imbalance and make things right (e.g.,
“I’m so sorry I got drunk and ruined your birthday party. I know how much
work you put into planning it. Perhaps I could throw a get-together in your
honor to make it up to you.”)

Acknowledge You Violated Social Norms or Expectations
One huge factor that prevents us from garnering authentic forgiveness from
people we’ve harmed is they don’t know whether we’ve learned our lesson.
Are we changed people or are we just as likely to commit the same
wrongdoing again? Therefore, we have to clearly acknowledge that our

actions violated certain expectations, rules, or social norms and offer
reasonable assurances that those will not be violated again in the future.
Further, when possible, we should be specific and explicit about the steps we
plan to take in order to make sure we avoid repeating our “offense” (e.g.,
“I’ve entered your birthday in my electronic calendar so I’ll get a reminder
every year.”)

Effective Apologies in Action
Once I described these six components to Judy, Antonia, and Yoshi they were
each able to identify numerous ways in which their initial apologies fell
short. For example, Antonia’s apology covered the three basics in that she
expressed ample regret for running over her mother’s foot, she made
numerous “I’m sorry” statements, and she repeatedly begged her mother for
forgiveness. Further, Antonia made efforts to atone for her actions (by
offering to drive her mother to the hospital and offering to help out around
the house), and she even expressed empathy for her mother’s physical pain.
But she did not do the one thing her mother needed most—Antonia failed to
acknowledge that she violated the family norm of never turning her back on
her parents and walking away (or in this case, turning the wheel and driving
away) and conveying disrespect to them by doing so. Until Antonia offered
her mother assurances that she would avoid violating this family rule in the
future, her mother would not be able to forgive her.
When Yoshi finally confessed to his parents that he would not be going to
Harvard Medical School and that he had not taken premed courses since his
freshman year, they were every bit as devastated as he feared they would be.
“My mom gasped and burst into tears and my dad just stood there stoically,
trying not to break down, saying nothing. I told them how sorry I was, that I
knew how much anguish, disappointment, and heartbreak I was causing
them. And still he said nothing. I told them I knew how wrong it was to
deceive them and to disrespect them by lying and I begged for their
forgiveness, but he didn’t utter a word. He couldn’t even look at me. Every
moment of his silence was like a dagger of guilt thrusting deeper into my
heart. Eventually there was nothing more I could say. He just turned, put his
arm around my mom, and walked out. They haven’t spoken to me since.”
Yoshi’s apology was extremely sincere and heartfelt and it had a lot going

for it in other ways as well. He was extremely sensitive to his parents’
feelings and he voiced repeated expressions of empathy. He also
acknowledged the many social and family norms he violated. However, the
one ingredient he omitted was that he made no offers to compensate his
parents for the huge sums of money they would have saved had Yoshi been
honest about his aspirations and attended a much less expensive school.
Doing so would have impressed upon them how sincere he was about
atoning for his transgression and doing the honorable thing. In addition, it
would also have allowed them to save face with friends and other family
members. They could explain that their son had a change of heart about
medical school and that he planned to take full responsibility for his decision
and repay the tuition they had invested in his education.
Obviously, even had he done so, the rupture in the relationship with his
parents was profound and it would take time for them to reestablish their
bond and mend things fully. But garnering even provisional forgiveness and
feeling as though he was at least on the path of relational repair would have
been sufficient for Yoshi’s guilt to begin to diminish.
Judy, who cheated on her husband, Blake, expressed a clear “I’m sorry”
statement as well as a statement of remorse (“It was a one-time thing and
I’ve regretted it ever since”). But she kept asking Blake to “believe” her,
rather than to “forgive” her. As simplistic as it might sound, if we never ask
the other person for forgiveness, we are not likely to receive it. Judy’s
apology was deficient in other regards as well. Although she acknowledged
her actions were wrong (“It was a stupid mistake!”), she did not explicitly
address the fact that she broke their marital vows of fidelity.
When I pointed this out to her, she insisted it wasn’t necessary to
acknowledge something that Blake already knew full well, as it would just
upset him further. But the real reason she failed to acknowledge she’d
violated their marital contract was that doing so would expose her to an
emotional “dodgeball in the face”—a surge in guilt and psychological
distress. While her reluctance was understandable, by not making such an
admission, Judy failed to come across as taking full responsibility for her
actions. Most important, Judy made various offers of atonement (for
example, by agreeing to call Blake every thirty minutes when she worked
late), but she failed to express sufficient empathy for what Blake was feeling
and she demonstrated no insight into his emotional state. As a result, she was

unable to validate Blake’s emotions in any way. For example, she said
nothing to acknowledge how difficult it would be for him to trust her going
forward or how challenging it would be for him to recapture his previous
feelings for the marriage, even if it were possible for him to do so.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: EFFECTIVE APOLOGIES
Dosage: Apply the principles in this treatment fully and thoughtfully to the
person(s) you have wronged. Make sure to craft your apology carefully
and give thought to the best time and place to deliver it.

Effective for: Reducing guilt and self-condemnation and repairing damaged
relationships.

Treatment B: Forgive Yourself
Apologizing to the person we harmed and receiving authentic forgiveness in
return can dramatically alleviate our guilt and make it unnecessary for us to
continue our avoidant behavior. However, forgiveness is sometimes
impossible to secure, either because circumstances do not allow it (such as
when the person we harmed is unavailable to us) or because our best efforts
to elicit forgiveness have already failed. In such situations our guilt
continues to poison our quality of life and our self-condemnation persists.
Although it is always preferable to receive forgiveness from the person
we’ve harmed, when we are unable to do so, the only way to ease our
torment is to forgive ourselves. Self-forgiveness is a process, not a decision
(granted, it is a process that starts with a decision). We first have to
recognize that we’ve beaten ourselves up enough and that our excessive guilt
is serving no productive purpose in our lives and then we have to make the
emotional effort necessary to work through it.
Self-forgiveness can be emotionally challenging but the results are
definitely worthwhile. Studies have demonstrated that self-forgiveness
reduces feelings of guilt and can eliminate our need to avoid the person we
harmed. It also increases our ability to enjoy life and decreases our tendency
to self-punish or act in ways that are self-destructive. Case in point, people
who forgave themselves for procrastinating when they should have been

studying were found to procrastinate significantly less than procrastinators
who did not explicitly forgive themselves.

The Steps for Attaining Self-Forgiveness
Self-forgiveness by no means implies our behavior was acceptable or that it
should be condoned or forgotten. Rather, self-forgiveness should be the
outcome of a conscious process, an effort to come to peace with our
wrongdoing. The danger of self-forgiveness is that we might forgive
ourselves too easily or too readily or that we might fail to implement the
changes, mindfulness, and caution necessary to prevent us from repeating
our transgressions. Therefore, self-forgiveness requires us first to take full
responsibility for our actions and give ourselves an honest and accurate
accounting of the events causing our guilt. We must be able to explicitly
acknowledge both our wrongdoings and their impact on the person we
harmed, both practically and emotionally.
Coming to terms with our actions and their consequences can be
emotionally uncomfortable if not painful but unless we go through such selfexamination any self-forgiveness we grant ourselves will not be authentic. In
cases in which our wrongdoing caused significant harm (e.g., we drove under
the influence and caused an accident that resulted in people dying or
suffering grave bodily harm) and we are unsure of whether we can or indeed
if we should find self-forgiveness, we should seek the counsel of a mental
health professional.
Once we take full responsibility for our actions and their consequences,
we will be ready to take the second step and work on forgiving ourselves. In
order to come to peace with our actions we will need to make some form of
amends or reparations for the harm we’ve caused and find ways to minimize
the likelihood of committing a similar transgression in the future.

EXERCISE FOR SELF-FORGIVENESS, PART 1: ACCOUNTABILITY
To create a clear divide between accountability and atonement the following
writing exercise is presented in two parts. The first will help you accurately
assess your part in the events so you can find ways to forgive yourself for
your wrongdoings in part 2 of the exercise. You may complete both parts of
the exercise as a single unit.

1. Describe your actions or inactions that led to the other person feeling
harmed.
2. Go through your description and take out any qualifiers or excuses. For
example, “She claimed she was insulted” should read, “She felt insulted.”
Items such as “He did the same thing to me once” or “She made it into a
bigger deal than it was” should be omitted entirely.
3. Summarize the harm the other person sustained both tangibly and
emotionally. For example, if you criticized a fellow employee unfairly and
that person was fired as a result, you should mention aspects such as his or
her economic hardship, the time and effort the person will need to invest in
order to find another job, the blow to the individual’s self-esteem, and his
or her feelings of embarrassment, resentment, and demoralization.
4. Go through your above description of harm and make sure it is as realistic
and as accurate as possible. It is important not to give yourself too much of
a pass, but you should not beat yourself into a pulp either. Counterintuitive
as it may seem, while some of us minimize the consequences of our
transgressions, plenty of us exaggerate them. For example, when Antonia
first told me about the incident with her mother she didn’t say, “I ran over
her foot,” she said, “I know this sounds terrible ... I ran her over with the
car,” which made me immediately envision Antonia mowing down her
mother while white-knuckling the wheel and doing sixty. Yes, she caused
her mother serious pain, emotional distress, and a frustrating healing
process—but that’s still vastly different from what most of us envision
when we hear someone was run over.
One way to make sure your descriptions are realistic is to imagine that an
objective stranger will film the description you write as if it were a script.
Would the film depict an identical rendition of the actual events? If not,
make whatever corrections are necessary.
1. Now that you have an accurate and realistic description of the events and
your responsibility in them, it is fair to consider extenuating circumstances.
Did you intend for events to unfold as they did? If so, why? If not, what
were your original intentions? For example, Antonia never intended to run
over her mother’s foot, and Yoshi’s original intent was not to wait three
years before telling his parents he was not going to medical school. He just
avoided the confrontation until his impending graduation prevented him
from keeping up the pretense. If your intention was to harm, it is important
to explain what drove you to do so and you will need to work on any

character flaws in part 2 of the exercise. If your intentions were benign,
what went wrong?
2. What extenuating circumstances, if any, contributed to your actions or to
their consequences? For example, Judy had met her colleague for drinks
during a particularly stressful period at work, and at a time she and Blake
were struggling with their three children. She proceeded to have too much
to drink and thus was more receptive than she might have otherwise been
to her colleague’s advances. The idea is not to excuse your actions, but to
understand the context in which they occurred so you can ultimately find
ways to forgive yourself for them.

EXERCISE FOR SELF-FORGIVENESS, PART 2: ATONEMENT
Now that you have a fair formulation of your actions, their consequences,
and their causes, you can focus on self-forgiveness. When you cannot make
amends to the person you’ve harmed, the best way to purge excessive guilt is
to “even the score,” first by making sure you don’t repeat your transgression
and then by atoning for your actions in some way. Studies have found that
both atonement and reparations are effective mechanisms for purging
excessive guilt, as long as you feel as though the actions you take represent a
fair way to “balance the scales.”
1. What changes do you need to make in your thinking, your habits, your
behavior, or your lifestyle that would minimize the likelihood of you
repeating the transgression in the future? For example, a parent who feels
guilty for disappointing his or her child by missing a basketball game or
school concert for the fifth time might decide to reevaluate his or her work
priorities and make changes that allow for fuller participation in the
children’s lives (i.e., switching jobs, taking a different role, or just
rearranging their work schedule).
2. Once we’ve minimized the likelihood of committing the same
transgression in the future, we need to purge our remaining guilt by atoning
for our actions or making meaningful reparations. One way to do this is to
strike a deal with ourselves and identify significant tasks, contributions, or
commitments that would make our self-forgiveness feel well earned. For
example, one fifteen-year-old girl I worked with who felt guilty about
repeatedly stealing money from her parents’ wallets decided to make
reparations when she discovered they had been struggling financially. She

was convinced that simply admitting to the theft would shatter her parents’
image of her as a “good girl” and cause them significant emotional distress
during an already difficult time. Since they never realized she had stolen
any money to begin with, her solution was to increase her babysitting shifts
and sneak the cash back into her mother’s wallet as she earned it. Keep in
mind that most teens who steal money from their parents’ wallets feel no
guilt whatsoever, let alone put themselves on a work detail reparations
program.
As another example, a young man I worked with was driving through a “bad
neighborhood” late at night when he scratched and dented two parked cars
while making a tight turn. He panicked and fled the scene without leaving a
note. He felt extremely guilty about his wrongdoing later on, especially when
he realized it was likely the owners of the two vehicles might not be able to
afford to repair the damage he had caused. He decided to atone for his
actions by donating money (an amount significantly larger than what he
estimated would have been the cost of the repairs) to a community center in
the area, as well as to a local youth program.
What atonement or reparations could you make so that, once completed,
your efforts would feel substantial enough to earn self-forgiveness?
1. Create a short ritual to mark the completion of your atonement. For
example, once the teenage girl who’d stolen money from her parents snuck
the last ten-dollar bill into her mother’s wallet, she planned to surprise her
parents by making dinner so she could enjoy her first guilt-free evening
with them. You might remove a photograph of the person you harmed from
an album and return it only once your task is complete and then literally
close the book on your guilt. Or if you decide to donate time or money to a
charity, find a way to note the completion of the task in some way, so as to
signal to yourself that your penance is now complete.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: FORGIVE YOURSELF
Dosage: Administer this treatment fully if you are unable to administer
Treatment A for whatever reason or if you’ve administered Treatment A
but were not successful in eliciting authentic forgiveness.

Effective for: Reducing guilt and self-condemnation.

Treatment C: Reengage in Life
Treating survivor or separation or disloyalty guilt is challenging because
there is nothing for which we need to take responsibility or atone. Ironic as it
may sound, it is easier to induce self-forgiveness when we’ve done
something wrong than it is when our hands are clean and there is nothing for
which we actually need to forgive ourselves. Nonetheless, while we cannot
undo the suffering and loss of others, we can take steps to end our own.
The best way to move past our guilt when we didn’t do anything wrong is
to remind ourselves of the many reasons it is crucial we do so. The following
three exercises are composed of sentiments my patients expressed over the
years that allowed them to shed survivor, separation, and disloyalty guilt.
Taken together, they represent powerful rationales for reengaging in life and
they offer various avenues through which we can each seek to do so.

EXERCISE FOR SUFFERERS OF SURVIVOR GUILT
The following writing exercise includes sentiments expressed by people who
suffered from survivor guilt but found ways to manage and overcome it.
Write a brief paragraph about how relevant sentiments might apply to your
own circumstance.
1. Morris was seventy-two when he lost his wife of fifty-one years to a heart
attack. “I realized it was unfair of me to mourn for so long. She would have
wanted me to enjoy the life I had left.”
2. Sylvia, a breast cancer survivor, lost her best friend to the disease. “If I
don’t live my life to the fullest it would be as if the cancer claimed another
victim. I decided it would be wrong to let cancer claim another victim.”
3. Joey was a father of three who lost his wife in a car accident when she was
running an errand he was supposed to do himself. “I felt dead inside for
many months. But I realized I had to get out of it. Otherwise my kids
would feel as though they had lost both parents.”
4. Jeremiah was the only member of his high school football team to get a full
scholarship to a top university. He felt guilty about it for months and then
spoke with his pastor. “He made me realize it would be ungrateful of me to
deny the gifts and chances I was given. The best way for me to show

gratitude is to take full advantage of them.”
5. Shandra was the sole member of her department to survive a brutal round
of layoffs. “I decided I’m going to excel, advance, and get to a position of
authority so I can make sure good employees don’t get fired.”

EXERCISE FOR SUFFERERS OF SEPARATION GUILT
The following writing exercise includes sentiments expressed by people who
overcame or learned to manage the separation guilt that arose when focusing
on their own lives meant being less focused on the needs of a loved one.
Write a brief paragraph describing how relevant sentiments might apply to
your own circumstance.
1. Billy is the father of a severely disabled child. “Caregiving is emotionally
stressful and extremely depleting. I figured out that when I make time to do
things that bring me satisfaction and, yeah, even joy, I have much more to
give.”
2. Wanda looks after an elderly parent. “I always keep the airplane
demonstrations in mind. In case of emergency, first put on your own
oxygen mask and then tend to the other person. You can’t take care of
others if you don’t take care of yourself.”
3. Marsha’s severely depressed husband would break down in tears whenever
she went out with friends. “I stayed home for months until I realized that
by going out and enjoying life I’m not projecting callousness, I’m
modeling optimism.”
4. Cam and Bev felt guilty about leaving their twin toddlers with a babysitter.
“They cried like they were being slaughtered the first time we left. But we
realized that the more we coddled them the less resilient and the less
independent they would be. Even if it hurts sometimes, we have to be able
to have date nights both for our sakes and for theirs.”

EXERCISE FOR SUFFERERS OF DISLOYALTY GUILT
The following writing exercise includes sentiments expressed by people who
overcame or learned to manage their disloyalty guilt. Write a brief paragraph
describing how relevant sentiments might apply to your own circumstance.
1. Levi, an accountant, was an orthodox Jew who fell in love with and

married a non-Jewish woman. His entire family felt betrayed but none
more so than his father. “His feelings are understandable. But if I let him
dictate how I should live my life he’d be basically leading two lives and I’d
be leading none—and that isn’t fair either.”
2. Juan’s Catholic father refused to accept his homosexuality. “I supported my
dad when he got fired from his job even though I was a kid and it made it
hard on me too. Remembering that made me realize I deserve the same
support from him. So instead of apologizing, I started demanding he show
me respect for having the honesty to live the life I believe in.”
3. Lucas came from a long line of home-schooled children. When he enrolled
his daughter in first grade at a private school, his mother, a home-schooling
advocate, took it as a personal rejection. “It didn’t matter how much I tried
to explain, she simply couldn’t get over it. But I realized I was not willing
to sacrifice doing what I know is right for my child because it might hurt
someone’s feelings.”

TREATMENT SUMMARY: REENGAGE IN LIFE
Dosage: Administer this treatment fully and repeat as necessary whenever
you feel surges of guilt about moving on or living your own life.

Effective for: Reducing guilt and self-condemnation.

When to Consult a Mental Health Professional
If you have applied the treatments in this chapter and you still feel
overwhelming guilt, if you are unable to apply them for whatever reason, or
if your guilt still impairs your quality of life and your relationships, consult a
mental health professional to assess whether there might be other
psychological factors at play, such as depression, anxiety, or post-traumatic
stress disorder.
If you find the exercises in Treatment B too difficult to complete, or if
you’re concerned about your ability to come up with accurate assessments of
your responsibility, you might benefit from discussing the events and your
feelings about them with a trained mental health professional. If your guilt is
so severe you have thoughts of hurting yourself or another person, consult a
mental health professional immediately or go to the nearest emergency room.

CHAPTER 5
RUMINATION
Picking at Emotional Scabs
When we encounter painful experiences we typically reflect on them, hoping
to reach the kinds of insights and epiphanies that reduce our distress and
allow us to move on. Yet for many of us who engage in this process of selfreflection, things go awry. Instead of attaining an emotional release we get
caught in a vicious cycle of rumination in which we replay the same
distressing scenes, memories, and feelings over and over again, feeling
worse every time we do. We become like hamsters trapped in a wheel of
emotional pain, running endlessly but going nowhere. What makes
rumination a form of psychological injury is that it provides no new
understandings that could heal our wounds and instead serves only to pick at
our scabs and infect them anew.
Unfortunately, our tendency to ruminate is set off almost solely by painful
feelings and experiences and rarely by positive or joyful ones. Few of us stay
up nights on end replaying how we had everyone in stitches at a dinner party.
Nor do we feel the need to go over every nuance of how our boss
complimented our latest efforts at work. But if everyone at the dinner party
was laughing at us rather than with us, or if our boss criticized our
performance and yelled at us in front of our colleagues, we can stew over it
for weeks.
The danger of rumination is not only that it deepens whatever emotional
distress we already feel about the events, but that it is linked to a wide range
of threats to our psychological and physical health. Specifically, rumination
increases our likelihood of becoming depressed and prolongs the duration of
depressive episodes when we have them; it is associated with greater risk of
alcohol abuse and eating disorders, it fosters negative thinking and impaired
problem solving, and it increases our psychological and physiological stress
responses and puts us at greater risk for cardiovascular disease.
Despite being aware of these dangers for decades, many psychotherapists
struggle when it comes to treating rumination in their patients because their

approaches are based on the assumption that the best way to purge ourselves
of our preoccupations is to talk them through. But when we have ruminative
tendencies, revisiting the same feelings and problems over and over again,
even with a therapist, only increases our drive to ruminate and makes matters
worse.
To be clear, not every attempt to analyze emotionally painful experiences
is doomed to cause us more harm than good. Certainly there are many forms
of self-reflection that are perfectly useful and adaptive. The question is, what
distinguishes these adaptive forms of self-reflection from the maladaptive
ones? Further, can those of us with ruminative tendencies find ways to think
about our feelings and problems more productively so that we don’t end up
picking at our emotional scabs and preventing them from healing?
These questions have been occupying and preoccupying the thoughts of a
new generation of researchers. Fortunately, their ruminations about
rumination have yielded fascinating studies and promising new approaches.
As a result, we’ve finally begun to pull back the veil on the mechanisms that
underlie both maladaptive rumination and helpful self-reflection and we’ve
begun to learn how we can modify our ruminative tendencies to make them
less damaging and more psychologically beneficial. In order to utilize these
new discoveries we first need a better understanding of the psychological
wounds rumination inflicts.

The Psychological Wounds Rumination Inflicts
Ruminating on our problems and feelings scratches at our emotional scabs
and causes four primary psychological wounds: it intensifies our sadness and
allows it to persist for far longer than it might have otherwise; likewise, it
intensifies and prolongs our anger; it hogs substantial amounts of emotional
and intellectual resources, inhibiting motivation, initiative, and our ability to
focus and think productively; and our need to discuss the same events or
feelings repeatedly for weeks, months, and sometimes years on end taxes the
patience and compassion of our social support systems and puts our
relationships at risk. Let’s examine each of these wounds in greater detail.

1. Supersizing Our Misery: Why Rumination and Sadness Are
Best Friends Forever

One of the reasons rumination is so difficult to treat is its self-reinforcing
nature. Ruminating about problems tends to make us even more upset about
them, and the more upset we are the stronger the urge to ruminate becomes.
This dynamic represents the primary reason rumination puts us at risk for
developing clinical depression: hyperfocusing on painful emotions and
experiences can damage our mood, distort our perceptions so we view our
lives more negatively, and make us feel helpless and hopeless as a result.
Further, once we have a tendency to ruminate, it becomes easy to trigger a
ruminative cycle whenever we self-reflect, even if there is nothing
necessarily distressing going on in our lives at that moment.
A simple experiment demonstrates this dynamic beautifully. Scientists
asked regular people on a regular day to reflect on their feelings for eight
minutes. Many of us can do this without it having any impact on our mood
whatsoever, and indeed, we might struggle to fathom why it should. But
people who were a little sad to begin with, and those with a tendency to
ruminate, reported feeling significantly sadder after this eight-minute
exercise than they had been previously. Again, people’s emotions were not
manipulated in any way in these experiments, they were simply asked to
think about their feelings.
My work with Linda, a corporate attorney, provides a good illustration of
how persistent ruminations can be. Linda graduated at the top of her class at
an excellent law school and was quickly snatched up by one of the best law
firms in New York City. A few years later, one of the firm’s senior partners
requested she transfer to his department and join his team. It was the most
exciting moment of Linda’s professional career to date. It was also the start
of her downfall. Her new boss turned out to be a nightmare. He was critical,
dismissive, patronizing, passive-aggressive, and condescending while at the
same time incredibly demanding of her time and efforts. He was also a
screamer, something to which Linda had not been exposed previously.
A year passed and Linda was utterly despondent. She considered
transferring back to her old department, but her new boss made sure to
dangle the carrot of partnership in front of her, hinting that if she improved
her efforts and worked harder, he would nominate her for the promotion
within a few years. He did give Linda above-average yearly reviews, but at
the same time he also continually put her down, diminished her
contributions, and embarrassed her by publicly belittling her efforts and

yelling at her in meetings. Linda found herself regularly crying in the
bathroom. With the encouragement of her husband, she decided to confront
her boss about when she would be nominated for partnership. He promised
that if she continued to perform as she had, he would nominate her by the
end of the following year. Linda asked him to put his promise in writing and,
much to her delight, he did.
Linda doubled her efforts. When her boss finally invited her to his office
to discuss her future she could barely contain her anticipation. But instead of
announcing her promotion, he handed her a terrible yearly review, chastised
her for “slacking off” (despite her having worked harder than ever before),
and told her she had no chance of making partner at the firm. Linda was
devastated. She transferred to another firm soon thereafter, taking a large pay
cut in the process.
Linda came to see me a full year after starting her new job because
although she liked her new boss, she simply could not stop ruminating about
her experiences with her old one. “I’m just miserable all the time,” she
explained. “I keep thinking about how he rolled his eyes whenever I spoke in
meetings, the expression of disgust he had when he criticized my work, how
angry he looked when he yelled at me in front of my colleagues.” The
emotional pain these and other experiences evoked was etched plainly on
Linda’s face. Linda had sought out psychotherapy previously, but doing so
had done little to reduce her ruminations and sadness.
Many traditional therapies involve patients examining their experiences in
great detail and from every angle, something that can actually increase
ruminative tendencies. Other approaches, such as cognitive therapy, involve
less heavy pondering and instead teach people to identify negative thoughts
so they can dispute them. However, this approach can also be problematic
where rumination is concerned because in order to practice refuting such
thoughts one has to keep bringing them to mind.
Illustrating this problem, in a recent study, researchers gave college
students at risk for depression either a cognitive therapy workbook or an
academic skills workbook. The participants’ levels of depression were
measured immediately after they completed the workbook and again four
months later. Subjects with high ruminative tendencies felt significantly
more depressed after completing the cognitive therapy workbook than those
who completed the academic skills workbook. Asking people with

ruminative tendencies to identify their negative thoughts and feelings, even if
for the purpose of learning to refute them, caused them to ruminate about
their feelings even more and to become sadder as a result. That their sad
feelings persisted even four months later is a testament to the tenacity of
ruminative urges once they become entrenched.

2. Anger Inflation: How Rumination and Venting Fan the Flames
of Fury
Another emotion that tends to elicit powerful ruminative urges is anger.
Many of us replay experiences that elicit our ire over and over in our heads.
As with the self-reinforcing cycle that gets triggered with sadness, the more
we ruminate about our anger and the more we discuss anger-provoking
thoughts and experiences with others, the angrier we feel as a result and the
stronger our urge to ruminate about these feelings and problems becomes.
Carlton, a young man I worked with a few years ago, fell prey to this very
dynamic. Carlton’s father had come from modest means, but after making a
fortune in the stock market he insisted his son want for nothing. For
example, after graduating from college, Carlton expressed an interest in
moving to New York. His father promptly put him up in a newly purchased
penthouse apartment and gave him a generous monthly allowance because,
as he told Carlton many times over the years, “Nothing but the best for my
son!”
Carlton tried his hand at several careers, landing one plum job after
another with the aid of his father’s connections. However, since he had
neither the experience nor the qualifications to succeed in these positions,
Carlton usually spent less than a year in each of them before being gently
advised by his superiors to “try something else” or to “move on.” The
suggestion that he wasn’t performing adequately caught him by surprise
more than once.
“I kept assuming these companies would never offer me a job I was
unqualified for. But they were just doing my dad a favor,” Carlton explained
when we first met. “Since they figured I wouldn’t be there for long, they
never told me what I wasn’t doing well or what I could do to improve.
They’d just ask me to leave. You have no idea how humiliating it was each
time it happened!” Carlton’s nostrils flared at the memory. “I didn’t ask my

dad for the apartment, I didn’t ask for the allowance, and I never asked for
help getting a job, not once. I’d just mention I was interested in something
and the next thing I knew I’d get a call about a possible opening. No one told
me these positions were over my head. Good ol’ Dad just kept setting me up
for failure. Nothing but the best for my son!” Carlton added in a bitter
imitation of what I assumed was his father’s voice.
When Carlton was twenty-five he met Solana, a marketing professional.
They married a year later. In the fall of 2008, a few months after their
wedding, the world entered a global recession and Carlton’s father was hit
hard. He was forced to sell the apartment in which Carlton and Solana were
living and to cut off every penny of his allowance. Carlton was between jobs
at the time and he and Solana found themselves having to manage with
Solana’s salary and the small sum of money Carlton had left in the bank.
“I started looking for work like crazy,” Carlton explained. “I applied to
hundreds of jobs over the next six months and got rejected by all of them. No
surprise there, my resume looked like one failed career choice after another.
My dad was so into being the hero, he didn’t care if it made me totally
financially dependent. He didn’t care if it screwed up my professional life.
He didn’t care that it could leave me with no chance of getting anywhere!”
Carlton’s face was red with anger. “I’m twenty-seven years old and I have no
skills, no qualifications, and no prospects! He ruined my life! I’m angry all
the time and poor Solana gets the brunt of it. She tells me to stop obsessing
about my father, but each time I get rejected from a job I hear his voice in
my head: Nothing but the best for my son! It’s making me crazy! If I don’t
stop yelling at Solana she’ll leave me. She’s even said as much. And then I’ll
really have nothing!”
Getting stuck in an angry ruminative loop can leave us awash in fury and
resentment and make us feel irritable and on edge much of the time. Angry
feelings activate our stress responses and our cardiovascular systems such
that over the long term, having consistent and intense anger ruminations can
place us at greater risk for developing cardiovascular disease.
An even more insidious consequence of anger ruminations is that the
general irritability they cause can make us overreact to the mildest
provocations. As a result we often end up taking out our frustrations on our
friends and family members. We snap at them, jump down their throats, and
respond in exaggerated ways to minor and everyday irritations.

As an illustration of how easily we displace our anger onto innocent
people, one study put people through a frustrating experience and then
induced some of them to ruminate about it. Participants who ruminated after
the frustrating experience were far more likely to display aggressive behavior
toward an inept but innocent confederate compared to those who had been
through the same frustrating experience but had not been induced to ruminate
about it afterward. Even though the confederate had nothing to do with the
situation that caused their frustration, the angry ruminators went as far as to
sabotage the confederate’s chances of getting a job they knew was hugely
important to his livelihood and career.
Although it is no treat for our partners and family members when we get
caught in a depressive ruminative loop, their quality of life (as well as ours)
tends to take a much greater hit when the ruminative cycle holding us
hostage is one of anger and irritability.

3. Cognitive Leakage: How Rumination Saps Our Intellectual
Resources
Rumination involves such intense brooding it consumes huge amounts of our
mental energies. By doing so it impairs our attention and concentration, our
problem-solving abilities, and our motivation and initiative. Further, the
faulty decision making we employ in its wake often proves incredibly costly
to our physical and mental health. For example, women with strong
ruminative tendencies were found to wait two months longer than women
without ruminative tendencies to see a physician after discovering a lump in
their breast—a potentially life-threatening difference. Other studies found
that cancer and coronary patients with ruminative tendencies had poorer
compliance with their medical regimens than people with similar disease
profiles who were not ruminators.
Rumination causes us to stew in our negative feelings until we become so
consumed with them that we begin to see our entire lives, histories, and
futures more bleakly. Our negative outlook then causes us to view our
problems as less manageable, to come up with fewer solutions to them, and
to avoid implementing the solutions we do find. We might be able to
recognize that certain mood-enhancing activities would be helpful to us but
we are far less willing to pursue such activities nonetheless.

This leads some of us to soothe our pain with alcohol or other substances.
Many of the ruminators I’ve worked with over the years claimed that
drinking eases their irritability and makes life more manageable for those
around them. While having a drink might take the edge off our irritability
and make us more agreeable to others, the question is whether someone can
stick with one drink or whether they tend to go for two, three, or more. When
we use alcohol to manage our mood, our consumption is unlikely to remain
at moderate levels for long. The more inebriated we get the less impulse
control we have and the more likely we are to express our anger and
aggression in destructive ways.
Our first steps onto the path toward alcohol abuse or dependence are often
prompted by a misguided effort to manage the emotional distress and anger
our ruminations cause. Some of us might turn to binge eating or purging
instead. But whether we turn to food or to alcohol or other substances to
manage such feelings, the ruminations causing them remain unaddressed and
we only increase the risk of sustaining long-lasting psychological damage.

4. Strained Relationships: How Our Loved Ones Pay a Price for
Our Ruminations
Our ruminations are often so consuming, we fail to consider how our need to
constantly discuss them can impact our friends and families and put a strain
on our most important relationships. In addition, we usually fail to spread
our efforts evenly and prefer to share our feelings with those who have been
most supportive and compassionate in the past, making them shoulder a
disproportionate load of supportive duties. Even if these individuals care for
us tremendously, repeating the same discussions over and over will
eventually tax their patience and compassion and risk making them feel
resentful and angry toward us as well. When I point out these risks to my
patients they grudgingly acknowledge why someone might lose patience but
not why that person might become resentful or angry.
To understand why this might happen we need to consider that lending
emotional support and assistance to people who are close to our hearts is one
of the most rewarding aspects of close friendships and relationships. Helping
others we care about makes us feel better about ourselves, it fosters stronger
relationship bonds, it increases trust and loyalty for both parties, and it
allows us to feel valuable and meaningful in the world.

Consider, then, that by bringing up the same thoughts and feelings we’ve
discussed many times before we cannot help but communicate to those
around us that their previous efforts to help us were ultimately lacking
because here we are asking them to do so all over again. At best they were
able to provide us with a measure of relief but it clearly didn’t last long if
we’re expecting them to repeat their efforts. Our supportive friends and
family members might not pick up on this embedded “insult” consciously but
they are likely to find themselves feeling vaguely angry and resentful
nonetheless.
Further, we each have an internal statute of limitations when it comes to
how long we feel it’s fair for someone to be distressed about certain events.
Once that period has expired and we’re asked to listen and be supportive
again nonetheless, we might offer our support and compassion out of duty,
obligation, or guilt but we’ll probably feel somewhat resentful and angry
about having to do so.
I once worked with a young man whose fiancée had left him only weeks
before their wedding, and he spoke about little else with his buddies for over
a year. From what I gleaned, his friends were showing every sign of losing
patience with his constant obsessions and soliloquies about his ex. They
started changing the nature of their get-togethers with him so that instead of
activities that fostered conversation, like golf, dinners, or meeting at bars,
they suggested movies and activities such as basketball or football.
Unfortunately, the young man did not heed any of his friends’ hints nor my
own warnings about their rising resentment. When he broached the subject
for the umpteenth time during a game of basketball, one of his friends
became so exasperated he stopped the game and yelled, “Come on, dude!
Just man up already!” and punctuated his statement by throwing the
basketball straight into my patient’s face, breaking his nose in the process.
Clearly the friend’s resentment had been building up over many months
and had reached a boiling point. But he hadn’t said a word about feeling
burdened by my patient’s incessant ruminations. Indeed, none of his friends
had. The assaultive friend did receive his comeuppance, however, as he spent
the next five hours in the emergency room, listening to my patient replay
nasal renditions of the breakup while avoiding sprays of bloody gauze from
his nose.
Of course, few of our friends throw things at us in exasperation when we

chew their ears off, but that doesn’t mean they don’t feel like doing so.
Intense ruminations can often make us so focused on our own emotional
needs that we become blind to those of the people around us and our
relationships often suffer as a result.

How to Treat the Psychological Wounds Rumination
Inflicts
It is natural to reflect on upsetting events after they occur and to mull them
over in our minds. The intensity and frequency of normative preoccupations
should decrease with time and as such they do not usually require treatment.
But when time has passed and the frequency and emotional intensity of our
preoccupations continue unabated, we should make efforts to break the cycle
of rumination and apply emotional first aid. Let’s open our psychological
medicine cabinet and examine the treatment options available to us.

General Treatment Guidelines
In order to break the self-reinforcing nature of ruminative thoughts and allow
our wounds to heal we must interrupt the cycle of rumination once it gets
triggered, and we should weaken the urge to ruminate at the source by
diminishing the intensity of the feelings that fuel it. We must also make
efforts to monitor our relationships and to ease the emotional burden we
might be placing on our loved ones.
The following treatments are listed in the order in which they should be
administered. Treatment A (changing perspective) is focused on reducing the
intensity of the urge that compels us to ruminate, and Treatment B
(distraction from emotional pain) is focused on reducing the frequency of
ruminative thoughts (which is easier to do once the urge to ruminate is less
intense). Treatment C (reframing anger) targets the anger and aggressive
impulses ruminations can evoke, and Treatment D (managing friendships) is
useful for monitoring our relationships with those who provide emotional
support.

Treatment A: Change Your Perspective

When scientists began investigating the mechanics of how we self-reflect on
painful feelings and experiences in an effort to understand what distinguishes
adaptive from maladaptive forms of self-reflection, one factor emerged as
hugely significant—the visual perspective we use when going over painful
experiences in our minds.
Our natural tendency when analyzing painful experiences is to do so from
a self- immersed perspective in which we see the scene through our own eyes
(also known as a first-person perspective). Analyzing our feelings in such a
way tends to allow our memories to unfold in a narrative form (i.e., the playby-play of how things happened) and to elicit emotions at a level of intensity
similar to when the events occurred.
But when the researchers asked people to analyze a painful experience
from a self- distanced perspective (a third-person perspective) and actually
see themselves within the scene from the point of view of an outside
observer, they found something quite remarkable. Instead of merely
recounting the events and how they felt about them at the time, people
tended to reconstruct their understanding of their experience and to
reinterpret it in ways that promoted new insights and feelings of closure.
This result was amplified even further when they suggested people employ a
self-distanced perspective while reflecting not on how things happened but
on why they happened.
In numerous studies, subjects who were asked to analyze painful
experiences this way experienced significantly less emotional pain than those
using self-immersive perspectives. In addition, their blood pressure was less
reactive (it rose less and it returned to normal baseline more quickly),
indicating that using self-distanced perspectives lowers our stress responses
and causes less activation of our cardiovascular systems. The good news
didn’t end there. Follow-ups one week later indicated that people using selfdistanced perspectives reported thinking about their painful experiences
significantly less often, and they felt less emotional pain when they did
ruminate about them than people who used self-immersed perspectives.
These findings held true for both depressive and anger ruminations.
When I first read about these findings I immediately thought of Linda, the
lawyer who ruminated about her abusive ex-boss. Linda’s descriptions of
how she saw her boss’s face (e.g., “I keep thinking about how he rolled his
eyes whenever I spoke in meetings”) clearly indicated she reflected on her

experiences using a self-immersed as opposed to a self-distanced
perspective. I was curious as to whether changing her perspective would
impact her ruminations. I told Linda how to tweak her ruminative thoughts
so she was using a self-distanced perspective and suggested she be as
judicious as possible in doing so until we met next two weeks later.
Linda walked into our next session with a huge smile on her face. “It
worked!” she announced before she even got to the couch. Linda reported
that for the week following our session she had been diligent about
employing a self-distanced perspective whenever she thought about her exboss; then she added, “But soon after that something shifted. It took me a
few days to realize it, but I was thinking about him far less than usual.” Even
better, when Linda did think about her ex-boss, she reported feeling much
less upset than she had before and she was able to put such thoughts aside
more easily. She also found it easier to use distraction (Treatment B) when
the thoughts did persist. The combination of the two approaches, perspective
change and distraction, helped significantly reduce her ruminations in a short
amount of time.

EXERCISE FOR CHANGING PERSPECTIVES
Switching visual perspectives to ones that afford us greater psychological
distance from the topics of our ruminations requires practice. Complete this
exercise when you have the time and space to do so without interruption and
practice the technique for each topic or experience that elicits unproductive
ruminations.
Sit or lie comfortably, close your eyes, and recall the opening snapshot of
the scene or the experience in question. Zoom out so you see yourself within
the scene, or if the scene involved two locations (e.g., if you were on the
phone) imagine a split screen so you see both yourself and the other person
or locale. Once you see yourself within the scene, zoom out even further so
you can watch the scene unfold from an even greater distance. Allow the
scene to unfold as you observe it from afar, as if you were a stranger who
happened to pass by as it occurred.
Make sure to use this same perspective every time you find yourself
thinking about the events in question.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: CHANGE YOUR PERSPECTIVE
Dosage: Practice the technique in this treatment when you can do so
without interruption and then apply it consistently whenever you
ruminate. Once the intensity of the feelings the rumination elicits and the
urge to ruminate subsides, focus on using Treatment B to cut off any
ruminative thoughts as soon as they appear.

Effective for: Reducing depressive and angry ruminations, and restoring
impaired intellectual and mental functioning.

Secondary benefits: Reducing physiological stress responses.

Treatment B: Look at the Birdie! Distract Yourself
from Emotional Pain
Even once our urge to ruminate is weaker, cutting off a ruminative train of
thought once it begins is still quite challenging. The main reason we tend to
indulge the urge to ruminate even once we’re fully aware of how damaging it
can be is that we often catch ourselves ruminating only once our emotions
are already churning. Trying to simply suppress our ruminative thoughts is
not only difficult, it is inadvisable too. Decades of research on thought
suppression demonstrates that nothing compels us to think of something
more than trying desperately not to think of it.
In now-classic experiments, people were instructed to see if they could
avoid thinking of a white bear for five minutes and to ring a bell if they
caught themselves thinking of one (the choice of white bear had no
significance other than it was assumed that white bears were not something
the subjects thought about often—maybe because the study was done in
Texas). Less than a few seconds passed before the average participant rang
the bell, and it was usually rung repeatedly thereafter. The more interesting
finding was that once the five minutes were over and the subjects were
“permitted” to think of whatever they liked, they experienced a rebound
effect and found themselves thinking about more white bears than the
average Klondike ice-cream truck driver. Since the original white bear

experiments, many studies have demonstrated that efforts to suppress
unwanted thoughts are likely to cause similar rebound effects, such that the
very thoughts we try to banish return with a vengeance the moment our
concentration wavers.
While suppression is a dud as far as our war on rumination goes,
distraction has proven to be a far more effective weapon. Dozens of studies
have demonstrated that distracting ourselves by engaging in tasks we find
absorbing or ones that demand our concentration, such as moderate to
intense cardiovascular activity, socializing, doing puzzles, or playing
computer games, will disrupt a ruminative thought process. Distraction has
also been found to restore the quality of our thinking and of our problemsolving abilities because once we cease ruminating, we recover our ability to
apply our intellectual skills effectively rather quickly.
While socializing or going to the movies can take our mind off our
ruminations, it is not always practical to engage in such time-consuming
activities. However, brief and less labor-intensive distractions can also be
effective in cutting off ruminative thoughts. For example, spending a few
minutes engaging in a brief mental exercise like completing a quick Sudoku
puzzle on our phone or imagining the layout of our local supermarket (e.g.,
aisle two—cleaning supplies and toiletries, aisle five—Klondike bars) was
found not only to interrupt people’s ruminations but to improve their mood
as well.
Identifying which distractions work best, given the specifics of our
situation (i.e., whether we are at home or at work, trying to study or sitting
on the subway) and the nature of our ruminations, can require trial and error,
as our assessments of how absorbing various activities or thought exercises
will be are not always accurate. Whenever possible, we should test out our
arsenal of potential distractions ahead of time so we can identify which work
best for the settings in which we tend to ruminate most. The more
distractions we have from which to choose, the more effectively we will be
able to derail the ruminative train of thoughts that plague us.

EXERCISE FOR IDENTIFYING POTENTIAL
DISTRACTIONS
Complete this writing exercise for each topic or experience about which you

tend to ruminate unproductively.
1. List the places and situations in which you tend to ruminate most often.
2. For each place and situation, list as many distractions as possible of both
short durations (e.g., a game of Sudoku or supermarket layouts) and longer
ones (e.g., a cardiovascular workout or catching a movie).
Once your list is complete carry it with you so you can refer to it when the
need arises even if you’re convinced you won’t have trouble recalling the
distractions you chose. Remember, our thinking is not as clear as it could be
when we’re in the midst of an intense rumination.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: DISTRACTION
Dosage: Create a list of distractions that work for you and apply the
treatment as soon as possible whenever you catch yourself entering a
ruminative cycle.

Effective for: Minimizing the impact of depressive and/or angry
ruminations, and restoring impaired intellectual and mental functioning.

Treatment C: Reframe the Anger
In the film Analyze This a psychiatrist (played by Billy Crystal) encourages a
patient who has anger issues to “hit a pillow” in order to let off steam. The
patient (Robert De Niro), who also happens to be a mobster, pulls out a gun
and fires a round of bullets into the pillow. The alarmed psychiatrist recovers
his composure enough to ask, “Feel better?” The mobster thinks for a
moment and then replies, “Yeah, I do!”
The notion that venting our anger produces a cathartic experience that will
reduce our rage and improve our psychological state is widespread even
among mental health professionals. Decades ago, therapists like the one
played by Billy Crystal began advocating we vent our anger by assaulting
benign objects and nary a couch pillow has felt safe ever since.
Indeed, the “catharsis model” of venting anger has spawned entire product
lines with numerous forms of “therapeutic” toys for both children and adults.

For example, one line of lifelike plastic figures comes with firm plastic bats
children can use to express their anger “productively”— by smashing the
humanlike figures in the face and head. The last time I observed a session in
which the therapist used one of these figures it featured a seven-year-old
bruiser who pummeled the figure mercilessly while the therapist stood to the
side, saying, “Yes, you’re very angry at Daddy, aren’t you?” Not exactly a
recipe for domestic tranquility, if you ask me.
The effectiveness of venting anger by letting off steam has been studied
extensively and the verdict of all such studies has been virtually unanimous
—the catharsis model is not only wrong, it is actually harmful! In one recent
study angered participants were placed into one of three groups. They were
instructed either to hit a punching bag while thinking of the person who
angered them, to hit the bag while thinking of a neutral subject, or to do
nothing at all. Subjects who hit the punching bag while thinking of the
person who angered them felt significantly angrier afterward and displayed
significantly more aggressive and vengeful behavior than those in the other
two groups (bad news indeed for the “daddy” of the bruiser). In fact, it was
the participants in the group that took no action at all who felt least angry
and who displayed the least aggressive behavior.
Venting our anger by assaulting benign objects only serves to reinforce our
aggressive urges in response to anger. These issues should be of special
concern for the innumerable parents whose children’s aggressive impulses
are unwittingly being strengthened with every swing of the bat and every
pound of the pillow.
So how should we manage our anger?
The most effective strategy for regulating emotions such as anger involves
reframing the event in our minds so that we change its meaning to one that is
less infuriating. By formulating a new interpretation of the events to one that
is more positive we change our underlying feeling about the situation to one
that is less enraging. For example, Michael Phelps, the most decorated
swimmer in history, was often subjected to his competitors’ taunts in the
press before major competitions. Phelps gave several interviews in which he
discussed how he dealt with the anger he felt in those situations. Rather than
pounding the lane divider in the pool while his coach whispered, “Yes,
you’re very angry at that German swimmer, aren’t you?” Phelps would
reframe the situation as one in which he envisioned his rivals’ taunts as

motivational fuel that spurred him to train harder and to focus even more
intently in his actual races.
Despite the effectiveness of reframing, many of us struggle to use the
technique because it is not always easy to reinterpret upsetting events in
benign ways. For example, Carlton, the man whose father went bankrupt and
left him without financial support, was so angry at his father’s previous
meddling in his career that it was all he could think about. His constant
ruminations exacerbated his anger to such a point that he had trouble
tolerating even minor frustrations, leaving his wife, Solana, to bear the brunt
of his irritability and aggression. Carlton needed to find a less enraging way
of thinking about his situation, but even after I explained why it was crucial
he do so, he struggled to reframe his situation in positive or more benign
terms. I tried pointing him in the right direction.
“Carlton, you have a college degree from a great university and you spent
the last five years working in every field in which you expressed an interest.
Even if you did so for only brief periods of time, you did get a taste of these
fields. Surely those experiences helped you figure out which of those
directions holds the most appeal as a career choice.”
“Sure. But what’s the point? I’ll never get the kind of job I really want
without my father pulling strings.”
“No, you won’t. But that’s exactly why you’re angry with your father. He
got you jobs you weren’t qualified for instead of allowing you to get the kind
of experience you needed. In the real world people don’t start where you did,
they start at the bottom and work their way up.”
“But then these past five years were entirely wasted! That’s what kills
me!”
“Well, not exactly. They helped you identify what you want to pursue. If
you thought of your previous experiences as internships that helped you
figure that out, you might be able to see them as time well spent. Now that
you know what you want you can start at the bottom and work your way up.”
“Don’t you get it?” Carlton snapped. “I don’t want to start at the bottom!”
“I know,” I responded softly, “and your dad didn’t want you to either. Was
it so terrible of him to want to spare you what you now wish you could spare
yourself?”
The color drained from Carlton’s face. He looked as if he had been struck.

He had never considered that his father’s hopes and intentions mirrored his
own so closely. But once he was able to reframe his father’s meddling as
well-intentioned as opposed to controlling, and his professional experiences
as instructive as opposed to wasteful, it had a huge impact on him. His
ruminations diminished rapidly, as did his anger and irritability. He began
searching for positions more suited to his training and lack of experience,
and within a few months he landed his first job entirely on his own merit—it
was an entry-level position at the bottom rung of the ladder, and Carlton
could not have been happier about it.
Reframing requires us to switch our perspective and to perceive the
situation in ways that change its meaning and, consequently, how we feel
about it. Although the focus here is on reducing anger, reframing can also
help us feel less sad, less disappointed, or less victimized. For example, had
Linda been promoted in her old law firm she would still be working for her
abusive boss. Distraught as she was about taking a step back professionally,
doing so did wonders for her quality of life. Reframing her boss’s behavior
as “useful” rather than as “destructive” allowed her to feel less victimized by
her experience.

EXERCISE FOR PRACTICING REFRAMING
Although your ruminations are unique to your specific circumstance, certain
themes and principles are common to many reframing situations. Use the
following four suggestions to help identify ways to reframe your situation so
that it elicits less anger (or sadness).
1. Find the positive intention. Much as Carlton’s father had good intentions,
most people who cause us to ruminate in anger have some redeeming
qualities and might mean well regardless of how their words or actions
impact us. Identifying these kernels of good can help us view the situation
differently and modify the intensity of our emotions as a result.
2. Identify the opportunities. Today, many companies insist their managers
reframe areas of weakness as “opportunities” when giving employees
feedback. Doing so makes negative feedback easier for the employee to
absorb without becoming demoralized. What makes this technique so
successful is the universal truth it embodies. Many distressing situations
might also provide opportunities for us to improve ourselves, to reevaluate
things, to change direction, or to address problems that needed fixing

anyway.
3. Embrace the learning moment. There is usually much we can learn from
the situations that elicit our ruminations. Identifying mistakes we’ve made
and ones we wish to avoid in the future, viewing negative situations as
strategic puzzles that require creative solutions, learning who we can count
on and who we cannot, and discovering our strengths, weaknesses, and
vulnerabilities can provide valuable lessons that will boost our confidence
and spare us future heartache and emotional distress.
4. View the offending person as needing spiritual help. Those of us with
strong religious beliefs can reframe many situations as ones in which the
person who caused us emotional distress is in obvious need of spiritual
help. As such they deserve not our anger but our prayers. A series of recent
studies examined the power of prayer to alleviate anger (using sound
scientific principles and blind peer-review processes) and found that it can
be an effective way to regulate our emotions, as long as the nature of our
prayer is positive. Tempting as it may be to do so, praying that the person
who angered us gets hit by a Mack truck will not make us less angry, as it
is the spiritual equivalent of shooting a couch pillow.
A secular version of this approach (albeit an untested one scientifically)
would be to view the offending person as someone who might be troubled
and in need of psychological help or psychotherapy.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: REFRAME THE ANGER
Dosage: Apply to situations, memories, or events that elicit anger or
sadness and are the subject of repeated ruminations. Write down the
reframed formulations you construct so you can revisit them whenever the
rumination occurs.

Effective for: Reducing anger and anger-focused ruminations (as well as
the intensity of other emotionally painful ruminations), restoring impaired
intellectual and mental functioning, and reducing physiological stress
responses.

Treatment D: Go Easy on Your Friends
When we repeatedly discuss the same problems with friends and family

members we risk taxing their patience and compassion and we also risk
making them feel resentful. In order to preserve these relationships we have
to assess whether we are overburdening those who provide us with emotional
support.

EXERCISE TO EVALUATE RELATIONSHIP STRAIN
Answer the following questions for each person in your social support
system and take the recommended actions when it is relevant to do so.
1. How much time has passed since the event in question?
Obviously some life events are extremely traumatic and they might dominate
our thoughts and feelings for months and years. However, most of our
ruminations do not fall in this category and we should be aware that people
expect us to recover within a certain time frame. For example, a general rule
of thumb for breakups is that it takes one to two months for every year of a
relationship to recover. If we were in a relationship for three years, we
should begin to recover from the initial surge of intense ruminations about
how and why the breakup happened within three to six months and we
should think twice about continuing to discuss the how and why aspect of
things with our friends if the topic still dominates our discussions a year
later.
1. How many times have you discussed these issues with this person?
We all have our go-to people when it comes to getting social support.
However, they are also the ones most likely to encounter “fatigue” when we
discuss the same ruminative thoughts, events, and feelings too often. It might
be wise to spread things around and utilize other sources of social support as
well so as to avoid overburdening the people we go to most.
1. Does this person feel comfortable bringing up his or her own issues and
problems?
If your conversations with a friend are too one-sided and tend to be all about
your problems and rarely about his or hers, you might be at risk of
jeopardizing the friendship. To assure a balance, make time to ask your
friends about their lives and to have entire conversations in which you focus

solely on them. If they ask about you when you are trying to do this, respond
briefly and refocus the conversation on them.
1. What percentage of your communications with this person is dominated by
the subject of your ruminations?
It is often only in hindsight that we realize the extent to which our
discussions with friends were dominated by the subject of our ruminations.
Allowing our emotional distress to dominate our relationships and determine
what our friendships are about is bad for our friendships, but defining
ourselves as victims is damaging to our own mental health as well. Make
sure you keep a balance of light conversation, enjoyable moments, and fun
whenever possible.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: GO EASY ON YOUR FRIENDS
Dosage: Apply periodically to evaluate the health of your supportive
relationships. Take action to repair any relationship damage when
necessary.

Effective for: Evaluating and repairing strained relationships.

When to Consult a Mental Health Professional
If you’ve applied the treatments in this chapter and your urge to ruminate is
still strong, if you find yourself ruminating just as frequently as you had
previously, or if your ruminations are so intense and distracting they interfere
with your basic ability to function in your professional or personal life, seek
the advice of a mental health professional. If your intrusive thoughts are not
focused on emotionally painful experiences but on things like catching
germs, forgetting to lock the front door, or whether you turned off the gas
before you left the house, a mental health professional will be able to assess
whether you’re exhibiting symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Rumination is also strongly tied to depression. If you think you might be
depressed and have symptoms such as a persistent low mood, feelings of
helplessness about changing your situation, feelings of hopelessness about
things getting any better, or disturbances in your eating and sleeping

patterns, consult a mental health professional to assess whether you require
professional treatment. If at any point you feel so emotionally distressed,
sad, or angry that you have the urge to harm yourself or another person, seek
immediate professional help or go to the nearest emergency room.

CHAPTER 6
FAILURE
How Emotional Chest Colds Become Psychological Pneumonias
None of us reach adulthood without encountering failure thousands of times
and many more such experiences await us in life going forward. Failure is so
common a human experience that what distinguishes us from one another is
not that we fail but rather how we respond when we do. Such differences are
especially apparent when observing those who fail more regularly and more
frequently than anyone else—toddlers. Trying, failing, and trying again is
one of the main ways toddlers learn. Fortunately, toddlers are generally
persistent and determined (otherwise we’d never learn to walk, talk, or do
much of anything), but they can also display dramatically different responses
to failure.
Imagine four toddlers playing with identical jack-in-the-box toys. To open
the box and release the cute teddy bear within, they need to slide a big button
on the side of the box to the left. They know the button is where the action is,
but sliding is a complex skill. Toddler #1 pulls the button. It doesn’t move.
She pushes the button hard. The box rolls out of reach. She extends her hand
toward it but it’s still out of reach. She turns away and starts playing with her
diaper. Toddler #2 fusses with the button for a few moments without success.
He sits back and stares at the box, his lower lip trembling, but makes no
further efforts to open it. Toddler #3 tries to pry open the top of the box by
force. Then she pulls the button. Undeterred, she keeps experimenting until
ten minutes later—success! She slides the button, the top springs open, and
Teddy pops out with a squeak. She squeals with delight, stuffs Teddy back
into the box, and tries all over again. Toddler #4 sees toddler #3 open her
box. He gets red in the face, smacks his own box with his fist, and bursts into
tears.
When we encounter failure as adults, we tend to respond in very similar
ways (albeit few of us resort to playing with our diapers). Failure can make
us perceive our goals as being out of reach, causing us to give up too quickly
(like toddler #1, whose box rolled away). Some of us feel so demoralized by

failure that we become frozen, passive, and helpless (like toddler #2, who
gave up). Some of us fail but keep trying until we succeed (like toddler #3),
and some of us become so stressed and self-conscious that we can’t think
straight (like toddler #4, who burst into tears).
How we deal with failure is crucial to our success in life as well as to our
general happiness and well-being. While some of us respond well to failure,
many of us do not. Failure always hurts and disappoints but it can also be an
informative, educational, and growth experience, as long as we take the
failure in stride, figure out what we need to do differently next time, and
persist in pursuing our goals. However, as with many of the psychological
wounds we sustain in daily life, ignoring the injuries failure inflicts can
make a bad situation worse, and at times, far worse.
Although our various ways of coping with failure are established early in
our lives, we are by no means doomed to follow in the footsteps of our
toddlerhood. Even those who respond to failures in the most unproductive
and damaging ways can learn to employ more favorable and psychologically
healthy coping styles. However, to do so, we must first understand the
impact failure has on us, the psychological wounds it causes, and the
emotional challenges we face if we wish to heal them.

The Psychological Wounds Failure Inflicts
Failures are the emotional equivalent of chest colds in that we all get them
and we all feel terrible when we do. We usually recover from chest colds
because we modify our activities accordingly once we get them—we rest,
drink warm fluids, and dress warmly. If we were to ignore a cold entirely it
would probably get worse and, in some cases, develop into pneumonia. We
face similar dangers to our mental health when we encounter failure, yet few
of us are aware of the need to employ the psychological equivalents of
resting, drinking warm fluids, and dressing warmly. As a result, many of our
failures cause unnecessary psychological damage, the implications of which
can harm our emotional well-being far beyond the impact of the original
incident.
Failure inflicts three specific psychological wounds that require emotional
first aid. It damages our self-esteem by inducing us to draw conclusions
about our skills, abilities, and capacities that are highly inaccurate and

distorted. It saps our confidence, motivation, and optimism, making us feel
helpless and trapped. And it can trigger unconscious stresses and fears that
lead us to inadvertently sabotage our future efforts.
One of the reasons so many of us sustain psychological damage from
failure is that it often takes only one or two incidents to set the entire vicious
cycle into play. Further, when a failure is especially significant or
meaningful to us (which it often is), leaving it untreated puts us at risk for
developing psychological complications such as shame, crippling
helplessness, and even clinical depression. Thus, what starts as a single
episode of failure—a small emotional cold—can develop into psychological
pneumonia that impacts our general functioning and mental health for the
worse.

1. Honey, I Shrunk My Self-Esteem: Why Our Goals Seem Bigger
and We Feel Smaller
Baseball players have long claimed that when they’re on a hitting streak the
ball literally seems bigger to them (and therefore easier to hit). Not
surprisingly, when they’re in a slump they report the baseball as appearing
smaller and more difficult to hit. Most psychologists never took such claims
seriously, perhaps because baseball players are a notoriously superstitious
lot. Some players refuse to wash their underwear after a win so they don’t
“jinx” it and others sleep with their bats in bed to break out of hitting
slumps. Which of those practices leads to more baseball wives sleeping on
the sofa is anyone’s guess.
When psychologists finally decided to investigate the players’ claims
scientifically they ran into a problem. It turns out major league umpires
frown at the notion of pausing baseball games to allow players to complete
psychological questionnaires. Consequently, scientists decided to test this
phenomenon using regular people ... and football.
Participants were asked to kick an American football through an adjusted
field goal from the ten-yard line. They each had ten kicks. Before making
any kicks, all subjects estimated the width and height of the goal similarly.
But after their attempts, subjects who failed at the task (by scoring two or
fewer successful kicks) estimated the goal as being 10 percent narrower and
higher, and those who succeeded estimated it as being 10 percent wider and

lower. It seems baseball players were right all along. Failure can make our
goal seem literally more difficult and more imposing than it had appeared
previously.
Failure not only makes our goal loom larger, it makes us feel “smaller” as
well. Failing can induce us to feel less intelligent, less attractive, less
capable, less skillful, and less competent—all of which have a hugely
negative impact on our confidence and on the outcome of our future efforts.
For example, if a college student fails a midterm exam, she might view
herself as less capable and view the class as more difficult, making her more
worried and less confident about doing well on the final. While some
students might knuckle down and work harder as a result, others might
become so intimidated they begin to question whether they can pass the class
at all.
But what if that failed midterm also happened to be the first exam they
ever took in college? What if they perceive not just the class but college as a
whole as being a greater challenge than they’re able to meet? Since they’re
unaware that failing the midterm has distorted their perceptions (such that
the class and college appear harder than they actually are), they might reach
premature and inappropriate decisions as a result. Indeed, many students
drop out early in their freshman year for this exact reason (and toddler #1 is
at risk for doing so as well).
Failure has an even greater impact on our self-esteem. Many of us respond
to failures by drawing damaging conclusions about our character and
abilities that seem incredibly compelling to us at the time even when they
have no merit whatsoever. Many of us react to failure by thinking or voicing
incredibly damaging thoughts such as: “I’m such a loser,” “I can’t do
anything right,” “I’m just not smart enough,” “I’m such an idiot,” “I’m a
total embarrassment,” “I deserve to lose,” “People like me never get
anywhere,” “Why would anyone want to hire/date me?” or similar character
assassinations.
Few people would argue that such demoralizing and unproductive thoughts
have any redeeming value. Yet too often we allow ourselves to indulge in
them, utter them aloud, and give them validity. If our six-year-old failed a
spelling test in school and announced, “I’m a stupid loser who can’t do
anything right,” most of us would swoop in, refute every word, and forbid
him to say such terrible things about himself ever again. We would have no

doubt that such negative thoughts would only make him feel worse in the
moment and make it harder for him to succeed in the future. Yet we
frequently fail to apply the very same logic and wisdom to our own
situations.
The negative generalizations we often make after failing are not only
inaccurate but they do more damage to our general self-worth and our future
performance than the initial failure that spawned them. Criticizing our
attributes so globally makes us hypersensitive to future failures, it can lead to
deep feelings of shame, and it can threaten our entire well-being. Further,
doing so prevents us from accurately assessing the causes of our failure so
we can avoid similar miscalculations in the future. For example, if we blame
our inability to attain personal improvement goals on our character
shortcomings we are unlikely to identify and correct crucial errors in
planning and strategic goal setting that are far more likely to be responsible
for our failure.

Why New Year Resolutions Often Nudge Our Self-Esteem in the
Wrong Direction
Every New Year we list our resolutions with hopes of improving our lives
and feeling better about ourselves, only to abandon our efforts entirely by
February (and often by January 2). As a result, instead of our self-esteem
being strengthened by our accomplishments, we’re left feeling weakened by
failure and disappointment, which we quickly attribute to a lack of
motivation or ability. We tell ourselves, “I guess I don’t want to change,” or
“I’m just too lazy to do anything about my life,” and feel even worse about
ourselves than we did on December 31.
What makes such conclusions unfortunate as well as inaccurate is that the
primary reason we complete so few of our resolutions is because we neglect
to think through how we plan to achieve them. Without a carefully crafted
plan in place our resolutions are unlikely to make it out of the starting gate
no matter how motivated or capable we are. Indeed, one of the most common
goal-planning errors we commit is neglecting to set a start date.
Another common New Year resolution error is goal bingeing. As a general
rule, if your resolution list is longer than the one your child made for Santa,
you might want to pare it down. Pauline, a recently divorced woman with

two school-age children, marched into my office on the first Monday after
the New Year and proudly thrust a sheet of paper into my hands. “My
resolutions,” she explained. “You’ve been encouraging me to take the wheel
and steer my life in the right direction, so here, I’m taking it!” I glanced at
Pauline’s list and flinched. It had the following items: go to the gym four
times a week and lose twenty-five pounds, try harder at work, organize the
closets at home, paint the bedroom, make five new friends, post a profile on
a dating website and go on at least two dates a month, join a book club,
volunteer one afternoon a month, take a wine-tasting class, teach myself how
to play the piano, and spend more time with the kids.
“What do you think?” she asked eagerly.
“I think that’s what taking the wheel looks like—if you were a NASCAR
driver,” I said with a smile. “It might be a little much for a soccer mom with
a minivan.”
I explained that when we set too many goals for ourselves we are unlikely
to complete any of them. Pauline’s list included an entire smorgasbord of
goal-setting errors. Some of the goals on her list conflicted with one another
(e.g., getting to the gym four times a week and spending more time with the
kids), others were too ambiguous (e.g., “try harder at work”), and others
were too difficult (e.g., making five new friends, volunteering one afternoon
a month, and going on two dates a month would be a challenging agenda for
most single women, let alone a working mother of two).
Having multiple goals would be less of a problem if we took the time to
prioritize them according to which were most urgent or most attainable given
the circumstances of our lives at the time. We also neglect to break down
long-term goals into smaller and more realistic subgoals. Without doing so,
many of our goals can appear daunting and overwhelming. Last, we rarely
take the time to develop action plans for dealing with the obstacles, hurdles,
and setbacks that might arise along the way and we’re then ill-equipped to
deal with them when they do.
In short, we frequently fail to complete our New Year resolutions (as well
as other goals) because we set the wrong goal(s) to begin with, and our selfesteem often suffers as a result.

2. Passivity and Helplessness: Why Not Only Mimes Get Trapped

Inside Invisible Boxes
Failures sap our confidence, our motivation, and our hope. They can make us
want to give up and forgo any future efforts and possibility of success. As a
general rule, the more sweeping and negative our assumptions about our
attributes and capacities are, the less motivated we’ll be, as few of us make
efforts to pursue goals we truly believe are out of reach. After all, if we’re
convinced we failed because we’re not smart enough, capable enough, or
fortunate enough, why would we persist?
What we neglect to take into consideration when the sting of failure is still
fresh and our self-esteem is still bruised is that the very assumptions and
perceptions that form the basis of our impulse to “surrender” are
fundamentally incorrect.
Lenny, a thirty-year-old office manager at a sales company, came to
psychotherapy after feeling increasingly depressed about his career.
Although his day job provided basic financial support for his wife and new
baby, Lenny’s true passion was magic. He was a slender young man with
angular features and a thick mustache (I’ve worked with numerous magicians
over the years and why so many of them have mustaches remains a mystery
to me). He wore oversized slacks and jackets, which I admit led me on more
than one occasion to hope he would interrupt our session to pull out a
stunning white dove, a cute rabbit, or even a string of colored handkerchiefs.
Alas, the most exciting thing Lenny ever whipped out of his jacket was a
throat lozenge.
Lenny had been performing as a magician since high school, but he never
became successful enough to quit his job with the sales company. Although
he was thrilled when his son was born, he also realized the added
responsibility represented the death knell to his aspirations as a magician.
Knowing little about the career path of magicians at that time, it wasn’t
immediately obvious to me why that would be so.
“There’s no way to make a living as a magician without an agent,” Lenny
explained, “and I’ve never been able to get one. A couple of years ago I sent
tapes to every agent out there, and nothing came of it. Yeah, I know,” Lenny
said, as if I was about to object, “you’re wondering if my signature trick was
good enough.” Of course I wasn’t wondering anything of the sort, but Lenny
explained that agents only take on magicians whose signature trick—the one
that serves as the magician’s calling card—is a killer. Apparently, Lenny’s

was not.
“I spent the last two years working on my signature trick,” Lenny
continued. “But a couple of months ago, I turned thirty. Yeah, I know,” he
said in response to yet another imaginary objection on my part, “thirty isn’t
old. But I figured it was time to give up magic and focus on supporting my
family. I stopped booking shows and I put away my stuff.” Lenny took a
deep breath. “But not doing magic anymore ... it’s killing me.” Lenny
swallowed hard. “Yeah, I know,” he continued, “it doesn’t matter how I feel
because there’s nothing I can do about it. I tried my best to make magic
work, and I failed. I’ll never be a professional magician: I have to accept that
and move on. That’s why I’m here, Doc. I need help. You have to help me
accept that my life as a magician is over. Maybe once I do, it won’t hurt so
much.”
Magic was Lenny’s lifelong passion, but his failure to secure an agent or
come up with a spectacular signature trick made him feel as though he’d
exhausted all his options. In his mind, the only choice he had left was to give
up his dream. Failure does that to us. It makes us feel hopeless and trapped,
and it induces us to give up. We tend to fall prey to this kind of defeatist
thinking far more than we realize. We get passed up for a promotion, so we
cease making efforts because we believe our boss won’t promote us no
matter how well we perform. We skip the voting booth because we don’t
believe the candidate of our choice can win. We refuse to go back to the
psychiatrist when our antidepressant medication fails because we assume if
one of them didn’t work, none of them will. We join a gym, sprain a muscle,
and conclude we’re too out of shape for physical activity. We break our diet
and conclude we’re one of those people who “just can’t lose weight.” When
our intimate advances keep getting rebuffed by our spouse we conclude he or
she no longer finds us attractive and we stop initiating sex.
In each of these scenarios failure convinces us that we have no chances of
getting what we want and so we stop trying. Failure can be very persuasive.
Failure can also be very misleading.
Accurate as we feel our assessments are, in the vast majority of situations,
ceasing our efforts only creates a self-fulfilling prophecy. By not taking
action we guarantee we won’t succeed, and we then view our eventual failure
not as a lack of persistence on our part but as a confirmation that success was
impossible all along. The fact that our own surrender has brought about the

very outcome we feared eludes us, as does the fact that our pessimism has
blinded us to the options and possibilities that do exist.
For example, we might have been second in line for the promotion at work
and therefore next up for advancement had we continued to perform well. We
could have campaigned for the political candidate we favored and by doing
so increased that candidate’s chances of getting elected. We could have tried
another antidepressant, as it often takes trying several medications to find the
one that works best for us (just as it does with over-the-counter pain
relievers). Becoming more educated about exercise could have helped us
avoid injury by planning workouts suited to our fitness level. If we found it
too difficult to stay on a diet we could have taken steps to strengthen our
motivation. And if our spouse rebuffed our advances we could have
discussed things with him or her and resolved any larger issues that were at
play.
Succumbing to feelings of pessimism, helplessness, and passivity is as
damaging to our mental health as ignoring a worsening cold is to our
physical health. Indeed, Lenny’s “chest cold” took a rapid turn for the worse
the moment he decided to give up magic. He became engulfed in feelings of
hopelessness, helplessness, and despair, and he was at risk for developing
full-blown depression, a “psychological pneumonia” that could threaten his
mental well-being.

3. Performance Pressure: What to Expect When Expecting to Fail
When we fail at tasks in which our expectations for success are low, the
psychological wounds failure inflicts are relatively minor. Failing to win a
national lottery rarely sends people into a depression and the vast majority of
untrained singers do not experience deep feelings of shame when they fail to
get on a singing show (although they definitely feel disappointed). But when
we possess the necessary skills and abilities to succeed and have
expectations of doing so we are likely to feel much stronger pressure to
perform well. Performance pressure can be useful in small doses but it
becomes extremely unproductive in larger ones, as it can foster test anxiety, a
fear of failure, and the risk of choking.
Many of us get anxious in test-taking situations regardless of our
intelligence, preparation, or familiarity with the material. One of the reasons

test anxiety is so common is that it is relatively easy to trigger. Even one
episode of heightened anxiety is sufficient for us to feel intensely anxious
when facing a similar situation in the future. Test anxiety is especially
problematic because it causes massive disruptions to our concentration, our
focus, and our ability to think clearly, all of which have a huge impact on our
performance. As a rule, anxiety tends to be extremely greedy when it comes
to our concentration and attention. The visceral discomfort it creates can be
so distracting, and the intellectual resources it hogs so critical, that we might
struggle to comprehend the nuances of questions, retrieve the relevant
information from our memory, formulate answers coherently, or choose the
best option from a multiple-choice list. As an illustration of how dramatic its
effects are, anxiety can cause us to score fifteen points lower than we would
otherwise on a basic IQ test—a hugely significant margin that can drop a
score from the Superior to the Average range.
One of the more insidious but lesser-known manifestations of test anxiety
occurs when we’re reminded of negative stereotypes about our gender, race,
ethnicity, or other group. Known as stereotype threat, such reminders often
trigger subconscious worries and fears of conforming to stereotypes, even
when entirely unwarranted and even when we believe the stereotype in
question has no validity whatsoever. Such worries, even if they barely
register in our awareness, can steal away just enough of our attention to
hamper our performance on the task at hand.
As an illustration of stereotype threat, consider what happens when girls
take math tests. When girls take math tests without boys present, they do
substantially better than when taking the test with boys. Even in the twentyfirst century, the presence of boys can subtly remind girls of the stereotypical
yet false belief that men are innately better at math than women.

We Have Nothing to Fear but Fear of Failing Itself
For some of us, failure is associated not just with disappointment and
frustration but with far more damaging feelings, such as embarrassment and
shame. As a result, the prospect of failing can be so intimidating that we
make unconscious efforts to lower expectations for our success. While
lowering expectations might seem like a reasonable approach, the way we go
about doing so can result in our unwittingly sabotaging ourselves and

bringing about the very outcome we fear.
Lydia, a woman in her late thirties I worked with some years ago, had
taken a ten-year break from her career in marketing to raise three young
children. When her youngest child started kindergarten, Lydia and her
husband agreed it was time for her to resume working. Lydia quickly
leveraged her connections to get job interviews at six different companies.
But despite her inside track and impressive credentials, none of them called
her back for a second interview. Lydia was horribly embarrassed by her
failure, not to mention truly befuddled. Although she believed she had done
the best she could, it quickly became apparent that a fear of failure had led
her to unconsciously sabotage one opportunity after the other. Or rather, it
quickly became apparent to me. Lydia, on the other hand, was convinced she
had done all she could to succeed.
“Look, I understand why the first company turned me down,” Lydia
explained. “I didn’t have time to read up on it before the interview because
my daughter had an important basketball game and I promised I’d bake
brownies for the team.” Lydia’s account of the second interview revealed an
equally unconvincing imperative. “Ah, you see, my mother called the night
before and I got stuck on the phone with her for three hours. She was upset
about my cousin’s wife feuding with her sister, and I felt bad about cutting
her off.” Lydia’s take on what went wrong in the third interview was just as
flimsy: “Well, what happened there was my nails were a mess and I thought
I’d have time to do a quick mani-pedi before the interview, but I misjudged
the time and got there half an hour late. Maybe forty-five minutes. Anyway,
they refused to see me. Can you believe it?” I certainly could believe it, but I
graciously refrained from nodding.
Lydia continued by explaining that a severe migraine headache kept her up
the night before her fourth interview. “I was exhausted! Could you believe I
even forgot to bring them a copy of my resume?” Lydia reported being
afflicted with sudden “gastrointestinal distress” the morning of her fifth
interview. “At some point my stomach was rumbling so loudly I just made a
joke about it and apologized. But they hadn’t heard a thing so it was kind of
an awkward moment. I’m sure I’ll laugh about it in the future.” I doubted
Lydia would ever find the situation chuckle-worthy, but again, I held my
tongue.
Lydia claimed her sixth interview would have gone well, except—“My

luck, I woke up on the wrong side of the bed, real irritable and impatient. My
husband thought I should go to the interview anyway, but I should have
listened to my gut and stayed home. The receptionist was so annoying I
ended up getting into an argument with her. The interviewer came out to see
what the ruckus was about and, whatever ... it just went downhill from there.
You know what they say, if it isn’t meant to be, it isn’t meant to be.”
Most people hearing Lydia’s account would immediately recognize an
obvious pattern of excuses, avoidance, and self-sabotaging behavior that was
sure to guarantee failure. But Lydia was truly oblivious to it. Her
unconscious mind knew that by having obstacles to blame for any possible
failures she could avoid the shame and embarrassment she feared. Fear of
failure makes many of us engage in all manner of self-handicapping
behaviors in which we exaggerate or create impediments to success without
being aware we’re doing so. Indeed, we are often extremely creative in the
self-handicapping devices we construct in order to have something to blame
for our failure.
Many of us procrastinate and “run out of time” to study before an
important test. We might go out with friends and drink too much the night
before an important presentation or get too little sleep. We might forget our
study materials on the subway or at a friend’s house. We might forget the
cherries when packing our ingredients for the county fair cherry-pie-baking
contest, or we might arrive at the marathon having packed only our left
sneaker. And as Lydia demonstrates, there are endless physical ailments we
can manufacture. If we do well despite these setbacks we have the added
bonus of giving ourselves extra credit for succeeding when the odds were
against us.
Of course, self-handicapping rarely leads to success. In addition, such
strategies prevent us from examining our failures accurately and drawing
useful conclusions about what we need to change or do differently in the
future. For example, Lydia’s resume might have needed changes or her jobinterviewing skills might have needed sharpening, but it is impossible to
assess such factors because they were obscured by the array of obstacles
Lydia placed in her own way.
The unconscious nature of self-handicapping can blind us to its existence
even when someone else points it out to us. Lydia was initially convinced
that every one of her excuses was valid and that her failure was due to events

over which she had absolutely no control. When I suggested otherwise, she
responded with statements such as “You don’t expect me to break a promise
to my daughter, do you?” and “The problem was I didn’t listen to my gut and
stay home. My gut never leads me astray.”

Fear of Failure in Families
Confronting Lydia’s fear of failure was all the more urgent because studies
show that parents who suffer from fear of failure often transmit such fears to
their children. Most parents view their children as extensions of themselves
as well as products of their parenting skills, so that when children fail,
parents’ own feelings of shame get triggered. They might then respond to
their child’s failure by withdrawing from them both subtly (e.g., with their
tone of voice or body language) and overtly (e.g., expressing disapproval or
anger). Children pick up on their parents’ withdrawal, which triggers their
own feelings of shame and teaches them that failures should be both feared
and avoided.
To be clear, in the vast majority of situations, parents are entirely unaware
they might be impacting their children so negatively. Lydia had three young
children whom she loved dearly. However, the fact remains that unless she
treated the psychological wounds failure inflicted and corrected her selfsabotaging habits, she was likely to perpetuate the cycle of fear of failure and
pass it on to her children.

Choking Under the Influence
Bill Buckner had a stellar career as a Major League Baseball player,
amassing over 2,700 hits, winning batting crowns, and playing as an All-Star.
But he is most known for the error he made when playing for the Boston Red
Sox in the 1986 World Series against the New York Mets. Buckner was on
first when a ground ball that should have been simple to block went by him,
costing the Red Sox the game and eventually the World Series. Buckner is
hardly the only athlete to choke in a championship game when executing a
simple skill they’ve performed perfectly thousands of times. Nonprofessional
athletes choke in clutch moments just as frequently and choking is also
common outside of sports.

Why do so many of us bowl a great game only to gutter the last ball? Why
does a gifted vocalist sing flawlessly in a crucial audition only to deliver a
cringe-worthy, off-key final note? Why does an advertising executive pitch
the perfect presentation to every client, only to stammer incoherently and
draw a blank when his company’s president steps into the room?
Psychologists began researching why we tend to choke under pressure
over two decades ago, but only recently have studies uncovered the
psychological mechanisms responsible for these mental gaffes. Choking
tends to happen because the stress we feel in high-pressure situations makes
us overthink tasks and draw attention away from the part of our brain that
executes the task automatically or fluidly. To illustrate this point try the
following exercise. Fill a coffee mug with water, hold it by the handle, and
walk it across the room. Easy, right? Now do it again, but this time, keep
your eyes on the water as you walk and focus on making the adjustments
necessary for the water not to spill. Most of us are far more likely to spill the
water when we’re trying not to than we are when we walk with the mug
without thinking about it.
Choking is based on a similar dynamic. The greater the pressure of the
situation, the more likely we are to overanalyze our actions and interfere
with the smooth execution of a task we’ve performed or rehearsed hundreds
of times. While we all make errors, choking usually occurs when the stakes
are extremely high. The ramifications of choking and the self-recriminations
that follow can be profound. Bill Buckner is still heckled for his gaffe even
twenty-five years later, and many of us have trouble living down our own
choking moments for years or even decades.

How to Treat the Psychological Wounds Failure
Inflicts
Failures are often painful but not all of them warrant emotional first aid.
Many of our failures are minor, and we shrug them off with relative ease,
even if they do sting for a short while. Even substantial and meaningful
failures might not require treatment if we are able to take them in stride,
accurately assess what we should do differently next time, put in the
necessary effort, and persist until we reach our goal.
But when we fail repeatedly or when we respond to failures in ways that

set back our confidence, our self-esteem, and our chances of future success,
we run the risk of allowing our emotional chest cold to turn into
psychological pneumonia. Because much of the anxiety associated with
failures can build upon itself, it is best to be prudent and apply psychological
first aid treatments as soon as possible after meaningful or bothersome
failures occur. Let’s open our psychological medicine cabinet and review our
treatment options.

General Treatment Guidelines
Failures inflict three kinds of psychological wounds. They damage our
confidence and self-esteem and make our goals seem further out of reach.
They distort our perceptions, make us feel hopeless about succeeding, and
compel us to give up or stop trying. And they can create the kind of
performance pressure that increases our anxiety and causes us to
unconsciously sabotage our future efforts.
Treatments A (getting support) and B (regaining control) help minimize
damage to confidence and self-esteem, they prevent the pessimistic and
defeatist mind-sets that lead to loss of motivation and giving up, and they
also boost our motivation, hope, and chances of success going forward.
Treatment C (taking responsibility) is focused on owning the failure as well
as the fears and feelings it elicits so as to minimize the likelihood of our selfsabotaging future efforts. Treatment D (managing performance pressure)
helps reduce performance pressure, fear of failure, test anxiety (and
stereotype threat), and choking.

Treatment A: Get Support and Get Real
Whenever a patient tells me about a disappointing and meaningful failure,
my first response is to express sympathy and express warm emotional
support—which often makes my patients reach for the tissue box. My second
response is to point to some of the lessons they could learn from the failure
that would help them going forward—which often makes them hurl the tissue
box in my direction. Having silver linings pointed out to us when we’re still
getting rained on is always somewhat annoying.
Nonetheless, I respond this way for two reasons: First, because I’m really

good at ducking. And second, because research has repeatedly demonstrated
the most effective way to treat the psychological wounds failure inflicts is to
find the positive lessons in what happened. Further, providing social and
emotional support alone often makes people who experienced a failure feel
worse.
But why is that so? Don’t we always benefit from empathy when we’re
hurting?
Receiving concern and emotional support when we’re still reeling from a
failure can actually validate our (mis)perceptions about the deficits and
shortcomings in our character and abilities. But if expressions of social
support are quickly followed by realistic evaluations of the failure’s
implications, we could benefit from receiving emotional validation while still
maintaining a realistic and grounded perspective that allows us to “get real.”
This one-two combination of getting emotional support and assessing what
we can gain or learn from the experience is the most effective strategy we
can take in the immediate aftermath of a stinging failure. Most of us are
proficient at getting emotional support, but figuring out the relevant
takeaways when we still feel bad about ourselves can be challenging.

EXERCISE TO FACILITATE LEARNING FROM FAILURE
The following writing exercise will help you identify what you can gain from
the failure. There are six general lessons that can be extracted from most
failure experiences. Apply each of these lessons to your own situation.
1. Failure is a great teacher. Thomas Edison failed thousands of times before
he invented the lightbulb and he viewed each failure as a learning
experience. In his words, “I haven’t failed once. I’ve learned ten thousand
things that don’t work.” Failure always tells us something about what we
need to change in our preparation or execution of the task. What should
you do differently next time?
2. Failure provides new opportunities. Henry Ford’s first two car companies
failed. Had they succeeded he might never have tried company number
three, which was when he hit on the idea of assembly line manufacturing
and became one of the richest men of his time. What opportunities might
your failure possibly present?
3. Failure can make us stronger. Diana Nyad was sixty-two years old when in

August 2011 she attempted to swim from Cuba to Florida, a distance of
103 miles. Unfortunately, asthma attacks forced her to give up her attempt
after covering sixty miles of the distance. Remarkably she tried again less
than two months later. This time she swam over eighty miles before painful
Portuguese man-of-war stings forced her doctors to pull her from the water.
Diana quickly announced she would not try the swim again. But once her
exhaustion and initial disappointment wore off she realized that her two
attempts had only made her stronger and more likely to succeed if she tried
again. She made another attempt in August 2012 and although she swam
farther than she had in her previous efforts, dangerous squalls forced her
out of the water before completing her quest.
We all get demoralized when we fail. But bouncing back from our failure
and learning from the experience will always make us stronger and more
likely to succeed in the future. In what ways might your failure make you
stronger?
1. Some failures are also successes. I’ve always wondered how the runner-up
in the Miss Universe pageant feels once she’s had some time to reflect and
pick out the confetti from her hair. Does she feel proud to have represented
her country so well, or does she feel devastated about coming so close and
not winning? It’s crushing when our amateur sports team loses the playoff
game but does that nullify the accomplishment of getting to the playoffs in
the first place? Sure, it’s disappointing we didn’t get the job offer after so
many rounds of interviews but surely we should feel encouraged about
being among the top applicants.
Many of our failures are also successes in some way, except we tend to focus
far more on aspects of failure than of success. No matter how disappointed
we feel, we should always acknowledge the ways in which we were
successful even if we ultimately failed. In what ways could you view your
failure as a success?
1. Failure makes future success more meaningful. Studies show that the
harder we work, the more failures and challenges we overcome, the greater
the meaning, joy, and satisfaction we derive when we eventually succeed.
Oscar Pistorius is a professional athlete from South Africa who in 2011 ran
the four-hundred-meter sprints at the Track and Field World
Championships in South Korea. However, unlike the other sprinters in the

field, Pistorius is a double amputee; both his legs were amputated when he
was a child. Running on metal “blades,” he became the first disabled
athlete ever to run in an able-bodied world championship meet. He then
capped off his achievement by advancing to the individual semifinals and
winning a silver medal in the relay races (as well as setting a national
record).
For Pistorius, just being on the track was a triumph. He had spent years
fighting in court for the right to run in the world championships and the
Olympics, eventually proving that his blades did not give him an
“advantage” over the other athletes. Even after winning the legal battle, he
struggled to make the minimum qualifying time for the event, failing to do so
until the very last race before the deadline—one week before the
championships began. When Pistorius took the track for his first race, every
camera in the stadium was pointed at him. The sheer awe and joy on his face
as his name was announced outshone that of every other athlete there and
gave goose bumps to anyone watching. Pistorius then repeated his stunning
performance and reached the semifinals of the four-hundred-meter sprints in
the London 2012 Olympics. (Sadly, Pistorius gave fans goose bumps of an
entirely different kind when he was arrested in February 2013 on charges of
killing his girlfriend.)
The more we fail, the greater the impact our eventual success will have on
our mood, self-esteem, and confidence. How much more will success mean
to you now that you’ve encountered failure?
1. Success is not always necessary. Recent studies have begun to illuminate a
surprising aspect about failure: many of the benefits we hope to reap by
pursuing our goals are not necessarily dependent on our ability to complete
them. In most situations, making steady progress toward our goals
contributes more toward our sustained happiness and self-fulfillment than
actually reaching them. The satisfaction, excitement, sense of pride, and
personal accomplishment we feel by inching ever closer to our target
combine to create a heady mix of satisfaction and joy that does wonders for
our mood, motivation, and psychological well-being. Can you identify
ways in which you derived meaning and satisfaction as you pursued your
goal?

TREATMENT SUMMARY: GET SUPPORT, THEN GET REAL

Dosage: Apply the treatment as soon as possible every time you
experience a meaningful failure.

Effective for: Minimizing damage to confidence, self-esteem, and
motivation.

Secondary benefits: Reduces performance pressure.

Treatment B: Focus on Factors in Your Control
Failing can make us feel trapped and helpless, as though events are out of
our control and we are doomed to fail. Once we believe nothing we do can
bring about a different outcome, we tend to give up or make only feeble
efforts. However, succumbing to such paralysis can turn an emotional cold
into psychological pneumonia, as hopelessness and helplessness often lead to
conditions such as clinical depression.
The tragedy of failure is that many of the assumptions and perceptions that
lead us to draw incapacitating conclusions about our lack of control are
actually false. Further, scientists have repeatedly demonstrated that changing
our perspective and focusing on aspects of the situation that are in our
control can have a hugely beneficial impact on our hope, motivation, and
self-esteem. In some cases, merely acquiring information that refutes our
incorrect assumptions of helplessness and lack of control is sufficient to cure
our paralysis and prevent our “emotional cold” from getting worse.
One study illustrated this point with a group of seniors over the age of
sixty-five. Seniors are often quite sedentary, which can seriously
compromise their health (though being sedentary isn’t a recipe for good
health at any age). The problem is that seniors today often believe that being
sedentary is a natural part of aging (which, of course, it isn’t). Scientists
taught the seniors to attribute their sedentary lifestyle not to age but to
factors that were entirely in their control, such as how much walking they
tended to do on a daily basis. One month later, this simple intervention led to
the seniors increasing their walking by two and a half miles a week (which is
hugely significant) and they reported equal improvements in their stamina
and mental health.

The best way to regain a sense of control over the circumstances that led
to our failure is to reexamine both our preparation (our goal planning) and
our performance (how we executed our efforts) so we can identify elements
that we perceived as being out of our control that could be in our control if
we approached or perceived them differently.

EXERCISE FOR GAINING CONTROL OF OUR GOAL
PLANNING
Since it is best to pursue one goal at a time, complete this exercise for each
goal separately. I’ve included the responses of Pauline, the recently divorced
woman with an abundance of New Year resolutions, for illustrative purposes.
Pauline agreed to prioritize the item “make new friends,” as her social circle
had been severely reduced over the course of the divorce and she was eager
to find new outlets for social engagements and new friends with whom she
could enjoy them.
1. Define your goal in as realistic and specific terms as possible.
Keep in mind: Formulate clear and measurable objectives. For example, “get
into shape for summer” is realistic but not specific. “Win the lottery” is
specific but not realistic, and “write a best-selling novel” is neither specific
(what is the novel about?) nor realistic (few novels become best sellers).
Pauline defined her goal as “find three venues to meet people with similar
interests.”
In addition, defining your goal in ways that are personally meaningful and
that you find inherently interesting and enjoyable will help maximize your
motivation over the long term. For example, you might define your weight
loss and exercise goal as “develop a healthier lifestyle that gives me greater
vitality and stamina so I can enjoy active pursuits with my children and
grandchildren for many years to come.” Give careful thought to the regimens
you choose as well. For example, your motivation to exercise might be
stronger and last longer if you joined a hiking group with friends than if you
ran on a treadmill in your basement alone.
1. Break down the goal into intermediate steps.
Keep in mind: How we break down our long-term goals into smaller

intermediate steps can have a huge and crucial impact on our motivation.
Intermediate goals that require too little effort can cause us to lose interest
and enthusiasm and become less engaged in pursuing our larger goal, and
thus hamper our motivation. Intermediate goals that are too challenging tend
to frustrate us and therefore also lead to a loss of motivation. Try to define
intermediate milestones that provide a challenge but aren’t too daunting. It is
best to get some successes under our belt, so we should ramp up slowly by
starting with easier challenges that become (incrementally) harder.
When defining our subgoals it is important to focus on variables within our
control (e.g., our performance) rather than those outside our control (e.g., a
specific outcome). For example, weight loss or fitness goals should focus on
what we eat or how much exercise we get (as those are within our control)
and not on how much weight we lose (as we cannot force our bodies to lose
weight at a predetermined rate). If we plan to start a blog we should
determine the allotments of time we plan to set aside to work on it, not the
actual progress we hope to make (as it is difficult to foresee programming
and design problems and other difficulties). It is better to feel we’re making
progress on our cheese lovers blog because we put in as many hours as we
said we would than to feel as though we’re failing because it took us half a
day to resize a stunning picture of Swiss Flösserkäse.
Pauline broke her goal into the following subgoals: “Make a list of activities
that interest me. Search online for possible venues. Explore one new venue a
week.”
1. Set time frames for the overall and intermediate goals.
Keep in mind: It is best to go through the intermediate goals on your list and
indicate two time frames for each, a starting date/hour and a completion
date/hour. Objective deadlines might make it necessary to create a time
frame for our larger goal first and then assign time frames to each of the
intermediate goals accordingly (such as when we’re training for a marathon
or creating a portfolio for an upcoming job or school interview), but when
possible we should set time frames for intermediate goals first, as doing so
allows for more realistic and attainable schedules. Much as we did when
forming our intermediate goals, making the time frames moderately
challenging is the best way to maintain our interest, effort, and motivation.
Pauline decided to start the next day and to explore one new venue a week
until she found a suitable one, after which she would explore a new venue

every two weeks.
1. List any potential detours, setbacks, or temptations that might arise.
Keep in mind: We would be wise to adopt the Boy Scouts’ motto and “be
prepared” by troubleshooting not only what might go wrong but what could
go wrong as well. For example, if our goal is to minimize our drinking and
adopt moderation we might anticipate the need to strategize what to do
during holiday parties at work but we should also consider what to do if
we’re asked to attend a last-minute business dinner with clients who are wine
lovers. Pauline anticipated potential problems with her babysitter, who had a
history of canceling at the last minute.
1. List the possible solutions for each of the above detours, setbacks, or
temptations, including what you can do to avoid them and how you plan to
implement these solutions. Phrase your implementation strategies as
positive actions (e.g., “If I’m offered a cigarette I will say, No, thanks, I
quit,” as opposed to, “If I’m offered a cigarette I won’t take it”).
Keep in mind: Anticipating problems and planning solutions to them ahead
of time is crucial for avoiding discouragement and maintaining motivation
and morale when difficulties arise. Any solution is only as good as our plan
to implement it. For example, asking women intending to get a breast cancer
exam to spend a few moments planning how and when they would do so
made them twice as likely to follow through with the exam than women who
did not make a plan. Pauline’s solution was to find a spare babysitter she
could call on if necessary.

Reexamining Our Execution of the Task
Not all our failures are due to faulty planning. We also need to identify ways
for gaining control of how we execute the task. For example, Lenny
abandoned his dreams of becoming a professional magician because he
believed he had tried everything he could to develop a great signature trick
yet still failed to do so. He spent hours going over lists of all the tricks he
knew. He tried brainstorming new combinations and elaborations that could
elevate them to a new level. But despite all these efforts, he failed to come
up with a show-stopping trick.

After hearing about his efforts, I expressed sympathy for his feelings of
disappointment (which made Lenny reach for the tissue box). I then told him
I disagreed with his assessment entirely, and prepared to duck. Lenny was
surprised by my comment but also extremely curious. I explained that there
were still many brainstorming avenues he could explore and that by trying to
generate ideas from his existing list of tricks he had actually limited his
options and inadvertently rendered his brainstorming efforts ineffective.
I then gave him examples of other ways in which he could approach
brainstorming, for example, from the top down, by first identifying
conceptual themes he found compelling (family, nostalgia, love, culture,
food, etc.) and only then considering how to evoke these concepts using
magic. Or he could start with the emotional impact he was trying to elicit
(awe, surprise, wonder, confusion, amazement, shock, etc.) as well as the
sequence in which he wanted to evoke them. Or he could focus first on
unconventional materials or approaches (such as reversals). For example, I
suggested that it would be hilarious if instead of holding out cards, putting
the chosen one in a hat, and pulling out a rabbit, he held out several rabbits
for the audience member to choose from, put the rabbit in the hat, and pulled
out a card (alas, Lenny did not share my vision).
Failure had caused Lenny to limit his options in other ways as well. He
was convinced audiences were more interested in reality television stars and
jokes about celebrities or politicians than they were in magic. However, he
never considered integrating these concepts into his existing act and
changing his patter accordingly. Lenny soon came to realize there were many
more avenues to explore and that it was too soon to give up on his dream.
His mood changed the instant he reached the decision and for the first time I
saw a sparkle of hope in his eye.

EXERCISE FOR GAINING CONTROL OF OUR TASK
EXECUTION
The goal in this writing exercise is to identify factors that contributed to the
failure and that are in your control and to determine how to address these
factors when making future efforts. I’ve included Lenny’s responses for
illustrative purposes.
1. Describe the failure in question. Make sure it is a single incident of failure.

For example, if you failed a driver’s test five times, list only the most
recent attempt.
Lenny wrote “I failed to become a professional magician.”
1. List all the factors that contributed to your failure.
Lenny listed “weak signature trick, no agent, lack of contacts, audiences
don’t care about magic.”
1. Identify which of the factors on your list are in your control and which are
not. For example, factors within your control might be “I failed to complete
the marathon because I didn’t give myself enough time to train,” or “My
marriage failed because we never learned to communicate with one
another.” Factors outside of your control might be “I failed the bar exam
because I get nervous during important tests,” or “I lost the customer
because the product we delivered had too many problems.”
Lenny listed the factors outside his control as “No agent will take me on
without a stronger signature trick,” “I’m not a good enough magician to
invent a great signature trick,” “I don’t have contacts that could help me get
more bookings or secure an agent,” and “Most audiences don’t care about
magic.” The only factor he listed as within his control was “Giving up magic
was my decision.”
1. Go through each factor you listed as being outside your control and try to
view it differently. See if you can replace the factor with one that is within
your control. For example, you might replace “I failed the bar exam
because I get nervous during important tests” with “I didn’t take steps to
manage my test anxiety” (because we can always learn ways to do so), and
you might replace “I failed to retain the customer because the product we
delivered had too many problems” with “I lacked the necessary complainthandling training to retain the customer” (because complaint-management
training is something we can always get).
Lenny switched “I’m not a good enough magician to invent a great signature
trick,” with “I only tried one brainstorming approach among many.” He
swapped “I don’t have contacts that could help me get more bookings or
secure an agent” with “I haven’t networked with other magicians, bookers,
and club owners as much as I could.” And he replaced “Most audiences

don’t care about magic” with “I haven’t restructured my tricks around topics
audiences care about.”
1. Once you’ve completed step 4, create a new list of action items that are
within your control. For each factor, identify how you might go about
addressing the issues or making the necessary changes to improve your
chances of future success.
Lenny decided to try three additional brainstorming techniques for his
signature trick and to allot himself an additional year within which to do so.
He also decided to focus on networking with other magicians, bookers, and
club owners and to increase his presence online using social media
platforms.
Eight months later Lenny left me a message letting me know he would be
performing his new signature trick—on television! The trick he came up
with was both moving and visually beautiful. But to me, the most magical
thing about his television debut was the sheer joy I saw on his face as he
performed.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: FOCUS ON FACTORS IN YOUR
CONTROL
Dosage: Apply the treatment as soon as possible every time you
experience a meaningful failure. Make sure to revisit the goal-planning
and execution exercises before making future efforts and whenever you
set new goals.

Effective for: Preventing or reducing feelings of helplessness and
hopelessness, increasing hope and motivation, and improving chances of
future success.

Secondary benefits: Minimizes damage to confidence and self-esteem and
reduces performance pressure.

Treatment C: Take Responsibility and Own the Fear

Although it is tempting to make excuses about our failure, doing so prevents
us from learning the many useful lessons it can teach us. Worse, the more we
deny any responsibility we might have, the more likely we are to feel as
though the situation is outside our control. By recognizing that failure
usually evokes at least some measure of fear and anxiety, we can begin to get
in touch with such feelings, own them, and thereby prevent them from
influencing our behavior unconsciously and destructively.
Lydia, the mother who sought to reenter the workplace after raising three
children, struggled because her self-esteem and confidence as a professional
were extremely low after a long hiatus from the workplace. Her unconscious
self-handicapping served to protect her self-esteem by providing ready-made
excuses for any failure she might encounter. Unfortunately, it practically
guaranteed her failure, a fact to which Lydia was completely blind. Once she
finished telling me about her sixth job interview fiasco (arguing with her
prospective boss’s receptionist), I decided to share my concerns with her.
“I sometimes get a little anxious about coming back to work after a weeklong vacation,” I began. “I can only imagine how terrifying it must be to
jump back into the workplace after an absence of over a decade.”
“Well, sure, yeah, it’s a little scary,” Lydia admitted.
“I’m sure it must be. Do you discuss that aspect of things with anyone?”
Lydia shook her head. I continued, “Feeling apprehensive, anxious, and even
scared is entirely natural, Lydia, especially given the changes in the
marketing industry over the past ten years. In fact, it would be weird if you
weren’t a little scared. But the way our fears work, if we don’t own them and
if we don’t talk about them, our mind will find other ways of expressing
them.”
“Like what?” Lydia asked.
“Like getting into fights with the secretary of the person who has to
determine whether you’d fit in well with his staff,” I responded with a smile.
“But you don’t know how irritating she was!” Lydia objected.
“Actually, I assume she was incredibly irritating,” I said. “But you have
three young kids, Lydia. I’m guessing you must be pretty used to handling
irritating and frustrating situations.” Lydia nodded. “Again, I think you
weren’t expressing your fears consciously so your mind decided to express
them for you.”

“Wait, you mean like the migraine and bad stomach? Those were real!”
“So is your anxiety about failing,” I responded. “But unless you own it and
figure out how to address it, I see more headaches and stomachaches in your
future.” I was relieved to see that Lydia didn’t argue this time, she just
became thoughtful. Difficult as it was, Lydia was eventually able to own her
feelings and take responsibility for each one of her failed job interviews (and
the self-handicapping that caused them). Once she did, she was able to
reengage in her job search in a much more productive manner. It took her
several more months of looking and numerous failed interviews but Lydia
eventually found a job in her field and reentered the workplace successfully.
We should all assume that where failure goes, anxiety and fear might
follow. The best way for us to own both our feelings and our failures is to
talk about them with supportive people. Airing our fears and exposing them
to trusted friends or family members will minimize our unconscious need to
express them self-destructively. Another option is to write about our fears in
a journal or blog, as long as we make sure to balance them with more
optimistic assessments.
One of the most effective ways to remove the emotional sting of failures is
to joke about them when it is possible or appropriate to do so. In studies,
seeing the humor in a failure was found to be an extremely effective way to
get over the pain as well as any embarrassment or shame a failure caused.
Being able to “see the funny” in a situation also helps reduce performance
pressure when making future attempts. By verbalizing our fears in joke form
we make it less necessary for our minds to express them unconsciously and
in self-defeating ways. Of course, not all failures are ones we can or should
laugh about, but many are.
One group of people who regularly practice laughing about their failures is
stand-up comedians. Many comics turn their painful experiences of failure
into jokes, and in doing so drastically reduce the pain the failure evokes. For
example, comic Jim Short found a way to deal with his feelings about his
financial failures and shortcomings by talking about them in his act. “I’m
thirty-four and I make seven thousand dollars a year. I’m a loser! I was sad
and depressed. And then I thought, wait a minute, I’m not a loser! I’ve tried!
I’m a failure!”
In 2011 Bill Buckner, the Red Sox player whose choking cost his team a
ticket to the World Series, played himself on Larry David’s Curb Your

Enthusiasm. In the episode, Buckner is heckled for not catching that crucial
ball at first base (yes, even decades later). Later, he passes by a burning
building, where a mother on the third floor is instructed by firefighters to
toss her baby into their net below. Reluctantly, the mother complies. The
baby drops into the net but bounces high into the air. The gathered onlookers
gasp and then collectively wince when they recognize Buckner and realize
the baby is headed straight in his direction. But Buckner reaches for the
baby, makes the perfect catch, and redeems himself, while the crowd breaks
into applause. Buckner’s appearance represented a real-life example of
someone who was able to laugh at his most painful failure and no doubt heal
the psychological wounds it inflicted by doing so.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: TAKE RESPONSIBILITY AND
OWN THE FEAR
Dosage: Apply the treatment as soon as possible every time you
experience a meaningful failure.

Effective for: Preventing or minimizing damaged confidence and selfesteem and taking the sting out of painful failures by finding the humor in
them.

Secondary benefits: Reduces performance pressure and fear of failure.

Treatment D: Distract Yourself from Performance
Pressure Distractions
Performance pressure can increase test anxiety, it can make us choke at
crucial moments, and it can drain our attention with worries about
conforming to stereotypes. It does so because the stress or anxiety we feel in
the moment steals attention from the task we’re executing, hampers our
performance, and makes us more likely to fail. We then feel even more
stressed and anxious going forward and the cycle deepens.
To treat the psychological wounds of performance pressure we have to

fight fire with fire. When stress and anxiety threaten to steal our attention we
need to steal it right back. Studies have demonstrated a number of ways to
distract ourselves from the distraction of performance pressure, and some of
them are as simple as whistling Dixie. In fact, one of them is whistling Dixie,
or rather whistling—whether “Dixie” is your warble of choice is up to you.
Let’s examine these countermeasures in more detail.

1. Whistle While You Choke
The Seven Dwarfs (from the Disney film Snow White) believe in whistling
while they work. I assume they too feared choking under pressure, because
studies have demonstrated that whistling can prevent us from overthinking
the kinds of automatic tasks we’ve done many times before and then choking
as a result (such as swinging a golf club, throwing a football, carrying a cup
of water, and, yes, Bill Buckner, catching an easy dribbler at first base). The
reason this works is that once we’re focused on the task at hand, whistling
requires just enough additional attention to leave none left over for
overthinking.
One word of caution: while you might find whistling incredibly useful in
certain situations, those around you might not. So keep in mind you don’t
have to perform a bird-calling aria to combat performance pressure;
whistling softly is just as effective.

2. Mumbling to Yourself During an Exam Does Not Mean You’re
Crazy
The most important thing we can do to avoid or minimize test anxiety is to
prepare and study for the test as best we can and avoid procrastinating when
doing so. The better prepared we are the less anxious we will feel on exam
day. However, test anxiety can strike us even when we’re well prepared,
hampering our ability to focus during exam time.
We therefore need to do two things: quell our anxiety and regain our focus.
The first will require us to sacrifice a tiny bit of exam time to calm ourselves
down. Even if we don’t realize it, anxiety can cause shallow breathing that
limits the oxygen we take in and increases our sense of panic. To restore
normal breathing and lower your panic you should put down your pen, look
away from the exam, and focus on your breathing for one minute as you

inhale and exhale to a count of three (count “in-two-three out-two-three” in
your head while doing so). As you count, notice how the air feels filling your
lungs and how it feels as you exhale. Roughly a minute should be sufficient
to stabilize your breathing and take the edge off your anxiety.
Next, we need to redirect our attention back to the task at hand and we
need to prevent our mind from worrying about how well or poorly we’re
doing and the implications thereof. The best way to keep our focus on the
specific steps required to answer the questions is by reasoning through them
aloud (but quietly—a whispered mumble will do). By vocalizing the
questions and reasoning aloud, we use just enough attentional resources to
deprive the part of our brain that wants to focus on worrying.

3. Neutralize the Stereotype
When we’re reminded of negative stereotypes about our gender, race,
ethnicity, or other group, it can trigger a subconscious worry about
conforming to these stereotypes that can prevent us from giving our full
attention to the task at hand. The best medicine in such situations is to
neutralize such worries by affirming our self-worth.
In a series of recent studies, four hundred seventh graders in a
socioeconomically diverse school were asked to choose a personal value
(e.g., athletic ability, close friendships, or strong family ties) and write a
brief essay about it at the start of the school year. Half the students were
instructed to choose a value that mattered to them and write about why it
mattered and how they expressed it, and half (as a control group) were told
to choose a value that did not matter to them and write about why it might
matter to someone else. The results were no less than astonishing. Students
who wrote about values that mattered to them narrowed the achievement gap
between black and white students by 40 percent and the effects lasted
through the eighth grade (two years). A similar experiment was done with
college women taking physics (women are chronically underrepresented in
the hard sciences). Women who did the self-affirmation exercise did
significantly better than their female counterparts who did not.
Of course, stereotype threat does not affect everyone, but the lower our
confidence the more likely we are to become distracted by such concerns
when reminders of them are present. If you feel you might be susceptible to

such worries, take time before the exam to write a brief essay about an aspect
of your character you value highly and about which you feel confident and
proud. Doing so is a good investment, as it requires little time and it can
make you more resilient to any irrelevant worries and anxieties a previous
failure might trigger.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: DISTRACT YOURSELF FROM
PERFORMANCE PRESSURE DISTRACTIONS
Dosage: Apply the treatment before and during situations in which you
might experience performance pressure or anxiety or in which stereotype
threat might come into play.

Effective for: Reducing performance pressure, test anxiety, stereotype
threat, and risk of choking.

Secondary benefits: Minimizes damaged confidence and self-esteem and
eases fear of failure.

When to Consult a Mental Health Professional
Treating the psychological wounds failure inflicts should bring you
emotional relief, foster your future preparation and performance, and allow
you to persist in making efforts toward your goals. However, if you’ve
applied the treatments in this chapter and still struggle with feelings of
hopelessness, helplessness, shame, or depression, you should seek the help of
a mental health professional. You should also seek professional help if these
treatments have not helped you lower performance pressure or if you
continue to fail at tasks at which you should be succeeding. Finally, if your
mood and outlook have become so bleak and despondent that you have
thoughts of harming yourself or others, please seek immediate help from a
mental health professional or go to your local emergency room.

CHAPTER 7
LOW SELF-ESTEEM
Weak Emotional Immune Systems
Everyone desires high self-esteem and if we were to judge by the vast
assortment of magazines, books, programs, products, and self-proclaimed
gurus that promise to deliver it, everyone can have it as well. That this
billion-dollar industry exists at all is remarkable given that decades of
research and thousands of scientific studies have demonstrated repeatedly
that the overwhelming majority of self-esteem programs simply don’t work.
It is a shame they don’t, because having low self-esteem is akin to having a
weak emotional immune system: it renders us more vulnerable to many of
the psychological injuries we sustain in daily life, such as failure and
rejection. Further, people with low self-esteem are often less happy, more
pessimistic, and less motivated than their higher-self-esteem counterparts.
They also have much worse moods; they face a greater risk of depression,
anxiety, and eating disorders; and they experience their relationships as less
fulfilling than people with higher self-esteem do.
The good news is that despite the many failed promises of the self-esteem
industry, researchers have found ways to boost our self-esteem and to
strengthen our emotional immune systems by doing so. While such
approaches cannot catapult someone’s low self-esteem into the extremely
high self-esteem range, that is probably for the best. Having very high selfesteem has its own set of pitfalls. For example, people with very high selfesteem tend to blame others for their own mistakes, they reject negative
feedback as unreliable, and they often struggle to accept the consequences of
their own actions. These tendencies render them likely to repeat the same
mistakes and have significant problems in the workplace and their
relationships and personal lives as a result.
At the very high end of self-esteem, narcissists possess an overly high and
grandiose opinion of themselves but are also quick to feel extremely hurt and
angry when criticized or devalued even if the criticism is minor (i.e., there
are no small insults to a narcissist). Because they feel so crushed by even

insignificant slights, they often have the nasty habit of seeking to retaliate
against the people who “punctured” their inflated sense of self. Perhaps
scientists should be seeking remedies for narcissism instead of for low selfesteem, but then again, life often finds ways to serve humble pie to those
who need it most.
While few of us are true narcissists, there has been a general “grade
inflation” in our collective self-esteem over the past few decades, spurred in
part by the lavish attentions of the self-esteem industry. Consequently,
studies indicate that today most of us are of two minds when it comes to our
self-esteem: we feel inadequate as individuals on one hand, yet believe we’re
better than “average” on the other.
Indeed, the word “average” itself has developed strangely negative
connotations. I say “strangely” because by definition, two-thirds of the
population is “average” at any given thing (with one-sixth of people being
above average and one-sixth below). Yet, these days, telling a student, an
employee, or a lover that his or her skills and abilities are “average” would
constitute an insult and a blow to the individual’s self-esteem. Most of us
believe we’re better drivers than average, that we’re funnier, more logical,
more popular, better looking, nicer, more trustworthy, wiser, and more
intelligent than average as well.
Ironically, while we’ve been developing an aversion to being average, selfesteem scientists have been amassing one piece of evidence after another
indicating that where our self-esteem is concerned, being average (not too
high, not too low) is the best thing for us. Ideally, our self-esteem should lie
in a range where our feelings of self-worth are both strong (not too low) and
stable (not too high and fragile). Indeed, people with strong and stable selfesteem have more realistic evaluations of their real-world strengths and
weaknesses and relatively more accurate assessments of how they’re
perceived by others, and they are usually the “healthiest,” psychologically
speaking.
Of course, this raises another question. How realistic are our selfassessments to begin with? In other words, does our self-esteem reflect the
real-world value of our skills and attributes compared to others or does it
reflect our subjective and often inaccurate assessments of these qualities
based on our own psychological biases?
Let’s use physical attractiveness as an example. Studies clearly

demonstrate that people with higher self-esteem believe they are more
attractive than people with lower self-esteem profess themselves to be. But
when scientists compared stripped-down photographs of higher-and lowerself-esteem people (no jewelry or makeup, just faces) it quickly became clear
that such is not the case. People with lower self-esteem were found to be just
as attractive as people with higher self-esteem were. But because low selfesteem can cause us to underestimate our attractiveness we often downplay
our strengths and we get less positive feedback about our appearance as a
result. On the other hand, people with higher self-esteem might dress more
attractively than their low self-esteem counterparts, which brings them more
positive feedback and fuels their self-esteem even more.

Is Our Self-Esteem Low if We Don’t Think Much of
Anyone Else Either?
An athletic young man I once worked with came to therapy to deal with his
“terribly low self-esteem.” He went on to describe his own body in extremely
critical terms and then quickly proceeded to discuss celebrities known for
having beautiful bodies while pointing out their “obvious and disgusting
flaws” (which were “obvious and disgusting” only to him). “I don’t think
you have low self-esteem,” I said to him as soon as he finished savaging
Brad Pitt for having “skinny arms and chicken legs.” “True, you hate your
body, but you hate everyone else’s body as well,” I pointed out while sucking
in my stomach. “You might have low self-esteem, but the larger problem is
your general negativity and unhappiness. Let’s discuss whether you might be
depressed.” Depression can cause us to feel generally negative about
everyone and everything (as well as a host of other symptoms) and it can
masquerade as low self-esteem.
Of course, not everyone with a negative outlook on life is necessarily
depressed, nor does such negativity necessarily indicate low self-esteem. For
example, years ago scientists thought people with low self-esteem were also
more prejudiced because they rated people of groups different from their
own negatively (e.g., people of different race or gender). However, the
scientists forgot to account for the fact that people with low self-esteem also
rated their own groups negatively, which means their assessments of other
groups weren’t prejudiced but rather part of their larger negativity. Once they

accounted for people’s ratings of their own group the researchers found that
people with low self-esteem were in fact less prejudiced than people with
high self-esteem were.
One last point of clarification is that our self-esteem includes both a
general sense of self-worth and how we feel about ourselves in specific
domains of our lives (as a spouse, parent, friend, lawyer, nurse, golfer, video
game player, etc.). When we think of ourselves as having low or high selfesteem we are usually referring to our global sense of self-worth. That being
said, how we feel about ourselves in the specific domains we consider
personally meaningful or important has a big impact on our general selfworth. For example, an aspiring chef might be much more bothered at the
thought that she was a terrible cook than a professional athlete would be.
Therefore, failures and success in meaningful domains of specific selfesteem can lead to changes in our global sense of self-worth as well.
Now that we’ve covered some of the basic foibles of our self-esteem, let’s
turn our attention to the psychological injuries we sustain when our selfesteem is low.

The Psychological Wounds Low Self-Esteem Inflicts
Low self-esteem can inflict three types of psychological wounds: It makes us
more vulnerable to many of the emotional and psychological injuries we
sustain in daily life, it makes us less able to absorb positive feedback and
other “emotional nutrients” when they come our way, and it makes us feel
insecure, ineffective, unconfident, and disempowered.
Boosting our self-esteem would strengthen our weakened emotional
immune system and buffer us against many of these threats to our
psychological well-being. Most of us know this from our own experience.
When we feel good about ourselves we are often able to shrug off the kinds
of setbacks, disappointments, or criticisms that on a “low self-esteem day”
would have a much greater impact. In order to apply emotional first aid
treatments successfully and boost our self-esteem we need to have a better
understanding of how each of these wounds operates. Let’s examine them in
greater detail.

1. Egos Under Siege: Greater Psychological Vulnerability

Low self-esteem makes us more vulnerable to the psychological slings and
arrows of daily life as even minor failures, rejections, or disappointments can
sail over our emotional walls, get through our psychological defenses, and
smash into our gut. When our self-esteem is low, normal “insults” like our
boss frowning at us disapprovingly in a meeting, losing the office football
pool, or a friend canceling plans to hang out with us impact our mood and
disposition far more than they should. We blame ourselves for such events,
we take them too personally, and we bounce back from them more slowly
than we might were our self-esteem higher. Indeed, when our self-esteem is
low, the barrage of hurts and slights we sustain on a regular basis can make
us feel as though our egos are under siege from every angle.
Although there is an ongoing discussion about the extent to which high
self-esteem functions as a general buffer (studies have only recently begun
distinguishing high self-esteem from too-high and fragile self-esteem), a
substantial body of research demonstrates that having high er self-esteem
(i.e., not too low) can make us more psychologically resilient and boost our
emotional immune systems on at least several different fronts.
For example, rejection hurts at all levels of self-esteem but brain scans
have demonstrated that people with low self-esteem experience rejection as
more painful than people with higher self-esteem do. Also, our psychological
responses to rejection are far less adaptive when our self-esteem is low, as
we typically withdraw and create more distance between ourselves and
others to minimize the risk of further rejection and pain. In some cases, our
psychological vulnerability and our efforts at self-protection can lead us to
push others away so consistently that we become socially or emotionally
isolated and place ourselves at risk for acute loneliness. Having low selfesteem also makes us more vulnerable to discrimination and the further loss
in self-esteem such experiences cause.
We are also more vulnerable to failure when our self-esteem is low. Failing
causes larger emotional blows and sharper declines in motivation in people
who have low self-esteem than it does in those with higher self-esteem. In
addition, we are likely to be less persistent after failing and to overgeneralize
the meaning of the failure such that we perceive it as indicative of a wider
and more serious set of shortcomings than it actually is. Failing also sets in
motion a vicious cycle of pushing low self-esteem even lower and therefore
making it even more vulnerable to future failures.

Having low self-esteem can also make us more vulnerable to anxiety. One
study examined reactions to emotionally arousing situations. Participants
were told they would be receiving “unpleasant electric shocks” (not that an
electric shock is ever “pleasant,” but these days it always falls short of being
outright painful; and most studies never actually shock participants at all, as
researchers are more interested in the anxiety generated by the anticipation
of a shock than people’s actual responses to being “zapped”). One group of
waiting participants was given an intervention to raise their self-esteem (they
were told they’d scored exceptionally well on a measure of verbal
intelligence) and the other group was not. The group that received the selfesteem boost demonstrated significantly less anxiety when waiting to be
“shocked” compared to the group that did not.
We also respond to stress much less effectively when our self-esteem is
low than we do when our self-esteem is higher, making us more vulnerable
to depression and anxiety as well as to a host of stress-related physical
ailments and conditions. Straightforward observations of stress hormones
such as cortisol have demonstrated that people with low self-esteem
generally respond to stress more poorly and maintain higher levels of cortisol
in their blood than people with high self-esteem do. High cortisol levels are
associated with high blood pressure, poor immune system functioning,
suppressed thyroid gland function, reduced muscle and bone density, and
poor cognitive performance.
One of the reasons higher self-esteem buffers the effects of stress on both
our psychological and physiological systems is that when our self-esteem is
low we tend to make negative feedback even more stressful by exaggerating
its implications and potential consequences. Further complicating matters,
the more stressed we are, the less able we are to exert self-control. We are
then likely to encounter slips and failures, judge ourselves too harshly for
them, and damage our self-esteem even further.

Self-Esteem, Stress, and Self-Control
Rudy, a commodities broker who had an extremely stressful job, came to
therapy to deal with a long-standing gambling problem. As stress built at
work, Rudy would have a powerful urge to spend the night gambling in
Atlantic City. He was able to resist this urge as long as the pressure at work
remained high, but as soon as the stress level subsided, Rudy’s willpower

gave out and off to gamble he would go. Rudy’s gambling binges often cost
him thousands and even tens of thousands of dollars, which he could not
afford. What made his self-loathing even greater after such episodes was that
he was well aware of the role stress played in this cycle and he knew the
triggers that preceded it (a reduction in stress after an intense period). Yet
despite recognizing the pattern that led to his destructive behavior, Rudy was
still powerless to stop it.
By the time Rudy showed up in my office he had gambled away his home,
his entire savings, and most of his retirement, and he’d moved in with a
friend. Needless to say, his self-esteem was at an all-time low. Determined as
Rudy was to change his ways, his company was a breeding ground for cycles
of heavy stress. But what made his situation even more urgent was that some
years earlier Rudy’s aging parents had signed a power of attorney that
granted Rudy access to their finances and Rudy worried that his parents’
home might be in jeopardy as well. Given his parents’ fragile health and their
complete lack of awareness about how bad their son’s problem had become,
Rudy worried that coming clean and nullifying the power of attorney would
cause them such significant emotional distress it might even endanger their
health.
Rudy’s reactions to stress were extreme in their self-destructiveness but
not unusual. Stress can substantially weaken our willpower and self-control
and make us revert to automatic and old habits without even realizing it. For
example, a stressful day might make a dieter leave the supermarket and drive
all the way home before snapping out of his daze and realizing that instead
of a salad he’d just purchased a large bucket of fried chicken.
When our self-esteem is low, we are far less likely to attribute slips in
willpower to mental and emotional fatigue (which are the more likely
culprits) and far more likely to assume they reflect fundamental character
deficits. Our self-esteem then drops yet another notch and we are even more
likely to blame ourselves unnecessarily when our willpower fails us in the
future.
The good news is that manipulations to boost self-esteem have been found
to help people better manage failure, rejection, anxiety, and (especially)
stress. Encouraging as such findings are, they illuminate only the benefits of
boosting our self-esteem, not how we might actually go about doing so.
Scientists tend to boost research subjects’ self-esteem by methods such as

giving them bogus feedback about their score on a test of verbal intelligence.
Obviously, we can’t go around lying to ourselves about how smart we are, or,
at least, most of us cannot. But the results of these experiments represent a
“proof of concept” that boosting self-esteem can strengthen our emotional
immune systems and make us more emotionally resilient.

2. No Dessert for Me! Why We Resist Positive Feedback and
Emotional Nourishment
It’s bad enough that having low self-esteem makes us more vulnerable to
negative psychological experiences but researchers have also demonstrated
that low self-esteem limits our ability to benefit from positive ones. In one
study, people were exposed to sad music to put them in a bad mood and were
then given the option to watch a comedy video to cheer up. Although people
with high self-esteem jumped on the chance to have a laugh, people with low
self-esteem agreed that watching the video would improve their mood, but
they declined to do so nonetheless.
When our self-esteem is low, the resistance we have to positive
experiences and information is quite sweeping. Unfortunately it includes
exactly the kind of feedback that could play a vital role in rebuilding our
self-worth and confidence and strengthening our emotional immune systems.
Yet, thirsty as we are for such information, when our self-esteem is low, we
are likely to reject it, avoid it, and at times even recoil from it.
Bo was a single man in his late twenties, a Southern gentleman who
seemed to have everything going for him. He was tall and handsome with a
stable job and in good health. But when it came to his personal life, Bo was
miserable. He had no “social circle” to speak of and the few separate friends
he did have seemed to walk all over him. His friends often stood him up,
leaving Bo waiting on the street or in the movie theater or restaurant. They
threw parties they told him about only after the fact. They criticized him
relentlessly and they borrowed hundreds and at times thousands of dollars
without paying him back. Bo was desperate to meet a woman he could settle
down with, but here too his friends were more of a hindrance than a support.
On the few occasions Bo tried talking to women at social events, his friends
would join the conversation and “jokingly” put him down. At times, they
even resorted to flirting with women in whom Bo had already expressed an
interest. Although on the surface Bo had everything going for him, he rarely

dated, and when he did, the relationships never lasted for more than a few
weeks.
Bo knew his biggest problem was his extremely low self-esteem. In fact,
one of the first things he told me when he came to therapy was that he was
an admitted “self-help junkie” with a penchant for positive affirmation
programs. Affirmations are positive statements about our self-worth, goals,
and futures, which one reads, listens to, or states aloud. They are widely
believed to contribute to healthy self-esteem, greater personal empowerment,
and increased motivation and well-being, and Bo had tried all of them. He
read The Secret and practiced the “law of attraction,” he sipped Chicken
Soup for the Soul, he spent weeks sleeping with expensive headgear via
which personalized messages realigned his “neuroprocessing” and “corrected
his brainwaves” (alas, the only thing they ended up “correcting” was his
bank account), and he listened to countless subliminal messages, such as “I
am worthy and able,” which he assured me maintained their “subliminal”
powers despite the messages being listed in bold print on the packaging in
which they arrived.
But after investing many years and thousands of dollars in positive
affirmation programs, Bo, like many other positive affirmation devotees, felt
as worthless and disempowered as ever. This raises two questions: First, why
did Bo keep investing time and money into positive affirmation programs
when none of them worked? And second, why did these programs weaken
Bo’s emotional immune system rather than strengthen it?
One reason Bo stuck with it is that because our self-esteem is so
subjective, our ability to assess whether it has changed for the better is rather
limited (unless we use more objective measures such as scientifically
established self-esteem questionnaires or other tangible criteria). In fact,
numerous studies have demonstrated that we are very likely to unconsciously
distort our memories of how we felt before starting a self-esteem program
such that we believe the program helped us improve when it actually did not.
For example, one study investigated a popular self-esteem product that
used audiotaped positive affirmations. Researchers measured participants’
self-esteem before and after they completed the program and found that their
self-esteem had not improved at all and had even declined in some cases. But
despite this stark reality, the participants happily reported feeling significant
improvements in their self-esteem because they unconsciously distorted their

memory and believed they had felt worse previously. This is why so many
bogus self-esteem programs have such glowing testimonials and commercial
success despite being entirely ineffective.
This brings us to the second question: why do positive affirmations leave
so many of their users feeling worse about themselves rather than better?
The answer requires a brief detour into the science of persuasion.
Persuasion studies have long established that messages that fall within the
boundaries of our established beliefs are persuasive to us, while those that
differ too substantially from our beliefs are usually rejected altogether. If we
believe we’re unattractive, we’re much more likely to accept a compliment
like “You look very nice today” than “Why, your beauty is breathtaking!”
Since positive affirmations are supposed to change how we feel about
ourselves, whether they fall inside or outside the boundaries of our own selfconcept is crucial to their effectiveness. When people with low self-esteem,
like Bo, are exposed to positive affirmations that differ too widely from their
existing self-beliefs, the affirmation is perceived as untrue and rejected in its
entirety and it actually strengthens their belief that the opposite is true.
Recent research into the usefulness of positive affirmations has
investigated these ideas and verified their potential to cause more harm than
good. In one experiment, subjects were asked to complete a variety of
questionnaires and then identify a trait they would like to possess but
believed they lacked. Researchers then told subjects the good (albeit
fictitious) news that they actually did possess the trait they desired. But
hearing the “good” news made subjects feel worse and register drops in selfesteem. In other words, the very people who most need positive affirmations
(like Bo) are those least likely to benefit from them (and most likely to be
harmed by them) because they are likely to find such messages too
discrepant from their current self-concepts. Rather than strengthening our
emotional immune systems, positive affirmation programs are likely to
weaken them even further.
When our self-esteem is chronically low, feeling unworthy becomes part
of our identity, something with which we feel comfortable, a way of being to
which we become accustomed. People with low self-esteem often feel more
comfortable with negative feedback, because it verifies their existing
feelings about themselves. One study found that poorly performing college
students who were given messages to bolster their self-esteem actually

declined academically as a result. Another found that when college students
with low self-esteem had roommates who thought better of them than they
did of themselves, they tended to look for new roommates. Indeed, one of the
areas in which low self-esteem and our resistance to positive messages is
especially problematic is in our relationships.

Low Self-Esteem and Relationships
People with low self-esteem have greater doubts about their partners’
affections for them than people with higher self-esteem do, and they report
less satisfaction in their marital and dating relationships as well. When our
self-esteem is low, we are quick to perceive any signs of rejection and
disapproval from our partners. We not only interpret many such messages too
negatively, we also tend to overgeneralize them and read far greater
disapproval into them than is intended.
Although our relationships could and should be sources of support, praise,
and, hence, increased self-esteem, people with low self-esteem have
tremendous difficulty taking in positive messages from their partners and
they often bristle against such emotional nutrients. In one study, praising
people with low self-esteem for being considerate boyfriends or girlfriends
(which is pretty mild as far as compliments go) was enough to make them
feel more insecure about their partners and view their entire relationship
more negatively.
Regardless of how parched we might be for positive feedback and
affirmation, when our self-esteem is low, compliments, reassurances, and
praise from our partners makes us feel pressured to live up to their
heightened expectations. We worry we will not be able to sustain such
efforts, that we will disappoint them (even when their expectations are well
within our capabilities), and that their love is conditional on our being able
to keep it up. As a result, rather than enjoy the closeness and intimacy that
compliments should evoke, people with low self-esteem often respond to
praise by shutting down, withdrawing, and becoming more distant.
Unfortunately, pulling away and acting defensively often “succeeds,” as it
lowers our partners’ expectations, tarnishes their perceptions of us, and
undermines the integrity and longevity of the entire relationship.
Indeed, many of Bo’s dating experiences took a turn for the worse when a

woman he considered attractive and successful made the mistake of
complimenting him for being sweet, kind, or considerate. “Boy, she doesn’t
know me at all!” Bo would joke self-disparagingly. “She has no idea of how
screwed up I am!” Bo would then make all kinds of unconscious efforts to
demonstrate exactly how “screwed up” he was, which, unsurprisingly, ended
in the woman breaking off their brief courtship. Bo would then take her
rejection as further proof that he could only “hide” his true (and
unacceptable) self for so long. The fact that the only unacceptable thing
about Bo was his terribly low self-esteem was a reality he was tragically
unable to acknowledge.

3. Chronic Backbone Pain: How Low Self-Esteem Makes Us Feel
Disempowered
Bo’s emotional immune system was extremely weak, affording him poor
resiliency against the many rejections and betrayals he sustained from his
“buddies.” Although he did his best to hide it, each backstabbing incident
upset him tremendously and left him feeling more defective, more
undeserving, and more inadequate than he had previously. Bo recognized he
was being taken for granted, taken advantage of, and generally mistreated by
his friends, but he felt completely disempowered to do anything about it. Not
only was he unable to limit his exposure in such situations (for example, by
refusing to lend people money), but he also felt incapable of avoiding the
company of people that were bound to hurt his feelings. “I’d rather have bad
friends than no friends” was how Bo justified his reluctance to make any
changes in his social life.
Studies have repeatedly demonstrated that people with low self-esteem
tend to speak up less in groups and social settings and take less initiative to
extricate themselves from unhappy relationships and friendships when they
find themselves embroiled in them. Having low self-esteem makes us feel
fundamentally insecure, unconfident, and undesirable in social situations and
our “beggars can’t be choosers” mentality leaves us feeling tremendously
disempowered and unassertive as a result. We become convinced that setting
limits, making demands, or stating expectations, however reasonable, will
cause the other person to reject us immediately and drop us like a hot potato.
Of course, others quickly recognize our reluctance to speak up, object, or cry
foul, which encourages them to take us for granted and be even less

considerate of our needs and feelings going forward.
The reality of Bo’s predicament was that some of his friends might indeed
reject him if he stood up to them or spoke up about their mistreatment of
him. However, others would not. I tried to impress upon him that speaking
up would constitute an important litmus test as to the quality and potential of
the friendship each person offered him. Those who did indeed care about
him, even somewhat, would respond to his objections by demonstrating some
kind of accommodation or consideration that Bo could build upon. Those
who did not were not worthy of his friendship to begin with.
To be clear, Bo’s friends were not necessarily terrible people, although
they were unlikely to win any humanitarian awards. Most of us only put in as
much effort as a situation requires from us. If we can “get away” with being
less considerate or less reciprocal, and various other forms of “getting
without giving,” many of us will, not because we’re evil, but simply because
we can. If people demanded or expected more of us we would do more, but
when they don’t, we don’t make the effort. This dynamic is true in
practically every relationship we have. When our self-esteem is low and we
expect very little of others, we are likely to get very little from them as well.
Changing this dynamic once a relationship is already established is
difficult because we’re in essence “changing the terms of the deal” after the
other person has already been operating under a specific set of assumptions
and expectations. That is why it is crucial to pay great attention to the
expectations we set up when our friendships and romantic relationships first
begin. Bo’s challenge was to identify which of his friends were worth
keeping and to find ways in which he could change the terms of “the deal” so
he could enjoy more reciprocity and mutual support from those who did care
about him and eliminate the ongoing damage his self-esteem was sustaining
from those who did not.
Gladys, a forty-year-old breast cancer survivor, is another example of
someone who had low self-esteem, although, unlike in Bo’s case, hers was
not a lifelong struggle but rather the result of horrific emotional blows she
had sustained over recent years. Without any prior warning, Gladys’s
husband had left her midway through her chemotherapy treatments some
years earlier. Demonstrating truly despicable cruelty, he chose to serve her
divorce papers by having someone wait for her outside the hospital the day
she was released after having a double mastectomy.

Although Gladys’s body recovered from the cancer, the chemotherapy, the
double mastectomy, and the several reconstructive surgeries that followed,
her self-esteem was not as fortunate. She never got over the blow of her
husband abandoning her while she was fighting for her life nor the manner in
which he did so. When I met Gladys, there was little evidence of the fighter
who’d survived a terrible disease, the high school track athlete who had a
closet full of medals and trophies, or the successful Web designer who’d
built her own business from scratch after her divorce. Instead, Gladys came
across as timid, insecure, and extremely unassertive.
Gladys did have a close circle of friends (many of whom were also breast
cancer survivors) but she had not gone on a single date since her divorce,
especially since she worked from home and had few opportunities to meet
eligible men. However, what finally convinced her to start psychotherapy
was that her low self-esteem began to have an impact on her business and her
income as well.
“I’ve never been terribly assertive but I became much worse after my
husband left. My business suffers because I often don’t get paid what I
deserve and I get talked into doing too many unpaid extras. I’m just not very
good at standing up to demanding people. I try but they bully and pressure
and I always end up giving in.” Gladys went on to describe how her biggest
client was also the worst offender. Despite already extracting huge
concessions and discounts for the services she provided, the client kept
demanding more. Gladys feared that refusing the requests would incite the
company to take its business elsewhere, a loss that would have significant
financial implications for her.
Much as Bo felt he had no room to make demands or set limits in his
friendships, Gladys felt too insecure, unconfident, and disempowered to do
so in her business. They were both convinced that their impoverished selfworth was an accurate reflection of their character and attributes, such that
they basically “got what they deserved.” Their lack of assertiveness and
backbone was a direct result of a weak emotional immune system that led
them to believe that any acts of assertion on their part would only bring
intolerable hurt, rejection, and disaster.

How to Treat the Psychological Wounds Low Self-

Esteem Inflicts
Our self-esteem fluctuates regularly and even people with generally high
self-esteem can have days in which they feel poorly about themselves. Such
temporary dips in self-worth rarely require emotional first aid as we usually
recover from them fairly swiftly. However, when our self-esteem is regularly
low, or when we feel unable to stand up for ourselves and to set limits with
friends or family members who treat us poorly or with disrespect, we need to
treat our psychological wounds and boost our self-esteem.
The treatments in this chapter should help “stop the bleeding” and set us
on the path to bolstering our sense of self-worth. However, improving our
self-esteem in deep and fundamental ways requires both time and substantial
effort. Higher self-esteem is essentially an outcome of doing well in our lives
and relationships. Internalizing the lessons of this chapter and applying them
cannot change our self-esteem overnight but it can give us the tools to
establish a track record of success that, over time, will strengthen our selfesteem and make it more stable. Therefore, in addition to providing initial
emotional relief, the treatments that follow should be adopted as daily
strategies and life habits. Let’s open our psychological medicine cabinet and
examine the treatment options available to us.

General Treatment Guidelines
Having low self-esteem weakens our emotional immune systems and inflicts
three kinds of psychological wounds: it makes us more vulnerable to
psychological injuries, it makes us dismissive of positive feedback and
resistant to emotional nutrients, and it makes us feel unassertive and
disempowered. The five treatments suggested in this chapter should be
administered to correct self-critical habits and negative self-perceptions,
especially following blows to self-esteem or if entering periods of increased
stress.
Administer the treatments in the order in which they are presented.
Treatment A (adopting self-compassion) helps prevent the self-critical mindsets that damage our already weakened emotional immune systems.
Treatments B (identifying and affirming strengths) and C (increasing
tolerance for compliments) are focused on recognizing, acknowledging, and
reconnecting to neglected or marginalized strengths, qualities, and abilities.

Treatments D (increasing personal empowerment) and E (strengthening selfcontrol) focus on rebuilding self-esteem and feelings of empowerment. At
the end of the chapter, I provide guidelines for assessing when one should
consult a mental health professional.

Treatment A: Adopt Self-Compassion and Silence the
Critical Voices in Your Head
Imagine witnessing an emotionally abusive parent berating her child for
getting a poor report card. The parent verbally attacks the child, mocks him,
and mercilessly belittles him without displaying a whit of empathy, support,
or compassion. Meanwhile, the child’s face registers utter devastation as he
absorbs one emotional blow after another. Most of us would find such a
scene extremely distressing to witness (especially those of us who grew up
with such parents) and we would immediately vow never to treat our own
children in such an abusive, cruel, and destructive manner.
And yet when our self-esteem is low, that is exactly how we treat
ourselves. We blame ourselves for our mistakes, failures, rejections, and
frustrations in the most harsh and self-punitive terms. We call ourselves
“losers” and “idiots,” we give ourselves stern “lectures,” and we replay the
scenes in our mind while ruminating on our inadequacies and deficiencies. In
other words, we treat ourselves even worse than an emotionally abusive
parent would. When I catch my patients running such damaging internal
sound tracks in their minds and point it out to them, they are usually quick to
respond, “I know I shouldn’t beat myself up about it but—” and then they go
on to justify why they should beat themselves up about it. When I ask if they
would ever treat their own children, their spouse, or their friends in a similar
manner they look at me horrified, as if doing so would be unthinkable.
When our self-esteem is low, this double standard is a trap we easily fall
into. Our reason abandons us and we struggle to implement the premise that
if we consider it abusive to speak to others a certain way we should never
direct such thoughts toward ourselves either. The first step we need to take
on the path toward self-compassion is to embrace the most simple and basic
fact that when our emotional immune systems are weak we should do
everything in our power to strengthen them, not devastate them even further.
Purging the emotionally abusive voices in our heads and adopting kinder,

more supportive ones instead is an absolute imperative.
People with low self-esteem often bristle at the notion of adopting selfcompassion when I first suggest it. They worry that switching off selfpunitive thoughts and replacing them with soothing and compassionate ones
will cause them to “slack off” and function more poorly, making their selfesteem even weaker and more vulnerable as a result. But such worries are
entirely unfounded, as studies demonstrate that exactly the opposite is true.
Practicing self-compassion actually strengthens our emotional immune
systems. In one study, self-compassion was found to buffer incoming college
students against homesickness, depression, and general dissatisfaction with
their choice of school. In others, individuals who practiced self-compassion
had quicker emotional recoveries from separation and divorce, and they
recovered more quickly from failure and rejection experiences.
Despite the obvious benefits of adopting self-compassion, it remains
challenging to do so when our self-esteem is low because the practice is so
foreign to our ordinary way of thinking, it can cause discomfort and even an
initial uptick in anxiety. Therefore, we must be determined to put an end to
the destructive sound tracks that make up the current playlists in our minds.
Once we truly accept that we require soothing and compassion far more than
we do emotional abuse, we can turn to the following exercise.

EXERCISE FOR ADOPTING SELF-COMPASSION
Complete the following writing exercise three times, each time describing an
event from your past (if possible, include at least one from your recent past).
Try to write about one event each day so that you complete the exercise over
three consecutive days.
1. We’ve all experienced failures, embarrassments, humiliations, or rejections
that made us feel self-critical and badly about ourselves. Choose one such
event and detail what actually happened and how you felt about it.
2. Imagine that the event happened to a dear friend or close family member
who then felt terrible about herself (or himself) because of it. Describe that
person’s experience of the event, how she would react and feel in the very
same situation.
3. You hate seeing this person in emotional pain and you decide to write her a
letter with the explicit purpose of making her feel better about herself.

Make sure to express kindness, understanding, and concern about the
experience she went through and how she felt as a result, and remind her of
why she is worthy of compassion and support.
4. Now describe your own experience and your feelings about the event
again, but this time, try to be as objective and understanding as you can
about what happened and about how you felt. Make sure not to sound
judgmental or negative. For example, you might note that your date never
called you back, as that is factual, but not that your date thought you were a
loser, because that is judgmental and nonfactual. Or that you made
mistakes during a presentation, but not that your colleagues disrespect you
as a result, because, regardless of how you perceived their reactions, when
our self-esteem is low we tend to misinterpret people’s facial expressions
too negatively.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: SELF-COMPASSION
Dosage: Apply the treatment over three days and repeat regularly until the
principles of self-compassion become engrained and automatic.

Effective for: Increasing emotional resilience and decreasing emotional
vulnerability and self-criticism.

Secondary benefits: Decreases resistance to positive feedback.

Treatment B: Identify Your Strengths and Affirm
Them
Positive affirmation die-hards like Bo, the Southern gentleman with low selfesteem, need not forsake them entirely. Although positive affirmations can be
damaging to people with low self-esteem, many positive affirmation routines
can be tweaked to make the affirmations easier for us to digest (e.g., by
affirming our need to take action when we’ve been wronged). Bo was
hesitant to dispense with positive affirmations altogether but he agreed to
adapt them to include action-oriented items such as “When I lend someone
money, asking him to pay me back is far less rude than his failing to repay

me in a timely manner,” and “When a friend upsets me I am entitled to speak
up.”
That being said, a much more effective way to use affirmations is to use
self-affirmations that identify and affirm valuable and important aspects of
ourselves we already know to be true, such as our trustworthiness, loyalty, or
work ethic (in contrast to positive affirmations, which affirm qualities we
would like to possess but don’t believe we do). Reminding ourselves that we
have significant worth regardless of any shortcomings we perceive in
ourselves provides an immediate boost to our self-esteem and renders us less
vulnerable to experiences of rejection or failure.
Another advantage of self-affirmations is they benefit us even when the
quality we’re affirming has nothing to do with the situation of the moment.
For example, if we’re hurting because we’ve been turned down for a
promotion we do not have to affirm our value as an employee in order to feel
better (which would be a hard sell in that moment anyway). Instead,
affirming that we are a good parent or a great wife, a thoughtful friend or a
champion quilter, a supportive brother or a great listener is sufficient to make
us feel better about ourselves as we walk out of our boss’s office without the
new title we had hoped to secure.
Ideally, we should employ self-affirmation exercises before we go into
situations that might provide a blow to our self-esteem (i.e., before our big
date, before the exam, before the job interview). This is also why it is best to
use such exercises on a regular basis, as we cannot always predict when
blows to our self-esteem might occur. Nonetheless, completing such
exercises after the fact still has significant value.

EXERCISE FOR SELF-AFFIRMATION
Complete the following writing exercise as regularly as possible (weekly is
good; daily is better). It is especially important to do the exercise when
facing situations of heightened stress (e.g., for tax accountants, during tax
season; for college students, during finals) or situations that pose potential
threats to self-esteem (e.g., when applying to schools or jobs), as that is
when our self-esteem might be most vulnerable. You will need two sheets of
blank paper.
1. On the first sheet of paper, make a list of your important attributes and

qualities, including any achievements you have that are significant or
meaningful to you. Aim for at least ten items and preferably many more.
2. If while brainstorming items for your list you think of responses that are
negative (e.g., “My boss thinks I’m a terrible employee”), critical (e.g.,
“I’m a loser”), or sarcastic (e.g., “What am I good at? Let’s see, there’s
napping ... and I’m a champ at breathing too!”), write them down on the
second sheet of paper.
3. Choose one item from the first sheet of paper that is especially meaningful
to you and write a brief essay (at least one paragraph) about why this
specific attribute, achievement, or experience is meaningful to you and
what role you hope it will play in your life.
4. Once you’ve completed the essay, take the second sheet of paper, crumple
it into a ball, and throw it in the garbage where it belongs.
5. On subsequent days, choose other items from your positive attribute list
and write about them, preferably each day, until you’ve completed the list.
Feel free to add to your list at any time or to write about specific items
several times.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: IDENTIFY YOUR STRENGTHS
AND AFFIRM THEM
Dosage: Apply the treatment until you complete your initial list and repeat
it whenever you anticipate stress or experience a blow to your self-esteem.

Effective for: Increasing emotional resilience, decreasing emotional
vulnerability, and minimizing feelings of disempowerment.

Secondary benefits: Decreases resistance to positive feedback and reduces
self-criticism.

Treatment C: Increase Your Tolerance for
Compliments
Having low self-esteem makes it difficult for us to absorb compliments and
positive feedback from others, especially our loved ones, and to use such

communications to rebuild our self-esteem. Instead, we are more comfortable
scanning the environment for any hints of negative feedback that might
confirm our (mis)perceptions of ourselves as being fundamentally unworthy
or inadequate.
Because this resistance to compliments operates on both conscious and
unconscious levels, some of us are aware we feel uncomfortable receiving
positive feedback from others but many of us are not. Our lack of awareness
is especially problematic when it comes to our romantic partners, because
when our self-esteem is low, we not only rebuff positive communications
from them but we also respond by withdrawing and devaluing the
relationship. I should note that the subject pool used in much of this research
was composed of college students and young adults. In my experience, longterm couples tend to be more aware when one or both members of the couple
are resistant to compliments and they refrain from voicing positive feedback
to the resistant person. Of course, that only exacerbates the problem for the
person with low self-esteem, as hearing fewer compliments and receiving
little positive affirmation from the person who knows us best is itself not
conducive to building feelings of self-worth.
On a positive note, several studies that used subjects of all ages have
demonstrated that by affirming aspects of our selves that are related to our
worth as relationship partners, we can bolster our “relationship self-esteem.”
Doing so renders any compliments we receive from our partners less
discrepant from our current self-views and makes us less likely to reject or
rebuff them. Affirming our value as relationship partners not only makes us
feel better about ourselves (by boosting our self-esteem), it also makes us
feel better about our partners and even about the relationship itself.

EXERCISE TO INCREASE OUR TOLERANCE OF
COMPLIMENTS
The following is a writing exercise that can and should be completed on a
regular basis (weekly or more when possible).
1. Think back to a time your partner, family member, or friend conveyed that
he or she appreciated, liked, or enjoyed something about you, such as a
personal quality you have or something you did that the person felt
strongly about. Describe the incident and explain what made the person

feel positively about you when it occurred.
2. What does displaying this attribute or behavior mean to you?
3. What benefits does having the attribute or behavior bring to your
relationships and friendships?
4. What other significant or meaningful functions or roles can the attribute or
behavior contribute to your life?

TREATMENT SUMMARY: INCREASE TOLERANCE FOR
COMPLIMENTS
Dosage: Apply the treatment regularly until you become more comfortable
with receiving compliments. Make sure to repeat whenever you
experience a blow to your self-esteem.

Effective for: Decreasing resistance to positive feedback and increasing
relational self-esteem.

Secondary benefits: Increases emotional resilience, decreases emotional
vulnerability, and minimizes feelings of disempowerment.

Treatment D: Increase Your Personal Empowerment
The vast majority of articles, books, and programs that promise to help us
feel more personally empowered fail to recognize a critical flaw in their
thinking—personal empowerment is not something one feels but rather
something one has. Sure, we might feel empowered after reading a book
about improving marital relationships, but unless we’re able to initiate a
productive dialogue with our partner and create actual changes, we are no
more empowered than we were when we started. To have an impact on our
self-esteem, feelings of personal empowerment must be supported by
evidence of having actual influence in the various spheres of our lives,
whether in our relationships, in our social or professional contexts, as
citizens, or even as consumers.
Converting our low self-esteem into assertive feelings of empowerment
might sound like a tall order but there is one aspect of personal

empowerment we can use to our advantage. Acting assertively and getting
results in one area of our lives tends to empower us in other areas of our
lives as well. Choosing our battles wisely and starting with smaller and
simpler acts of assertiveness can quickly get the ball of empowerment
rolling, as even small triumphs provide a significant boost to our self-esteem
and make us feel generally more powerful, effective, and assertive.
For example, many of us have had the experience of feeling so “pumped
up” by resolving, say, a consumer or customer service complaint
(successfully removing charges from our bank statement, perhaps) that we
walked straight over to our teenager’s bedroom and told her to do something
about the mess with such conviction that, for the first time in months, she
actually did as we asked without arguing.
Because one successful act of assertion and personal empowerment
encourages another, we need to identify areas for potential assertive action
that have both a high likelihood of success and manageable consequences in
the event of failure. The best way to do so is first to gather as much
information as we can about how to attain our goal and to formulate wellthought-out strategies and plans for proceeding. We can then begin a process
of practicing assertive actions in lower-stakes situations so we can refine our
technique, our approach, and our skills as we go.

EXERCISE FOR IDENTIFYING OPTIONS FOR ASSERTIVE
ACTION
1. Think about aspects of your life that tend to make you feel frustrated. Try
to include situations in your community life, work life, family and personal
life, social life, and life as a consumer. Describe at least three examples for
each of these domains. For example, when thinking about your married life
you might feel frustrated about a spouse’s personal habits, the division of
labor between you, your partner’s style of communication, or his or her
approach to parenting.
2. Rank your items according to which of them have both a high likelihood of
success and manageable consequences in case of failure. For example, Bo
decided to speak up about the two thousand dollars he had lent his friend
Timothy; Timothy had promised to return it within three months, and a
year had passed. Timothy was Bo’s “least-close friend” and Bo felt

justified enough in the situation to be willing to risk the friendship and
discuss the matter with him. And Gladys decided to speak up about a
couple of “website tweaks” her client had asked her to “throw in” free of
charge; Gladys felt the “tweaks” in question were not crucial enough to
prompt her client to fire her if she refused to do them without
compensation.
The final list represents your master plan for practicing assertive actions and
attaining personal empowerment. Now that you’ve identified and prioritized
your goals, it’s time to consider any additional information or specific skill
sets that can help you execute them successfully and to plan your strategy
accordingly.

Gathering Information and Strategic Planning
To maximize our chances of attaining each goal, we need to consider how the
systems or people we plan to challenge operate. In other words, we need to
gain a grasp of the priorities and mind-sets of any relevant people; the
complaint management systems of any relevant businesses, companies, or
local municipalities; or the politics, hierarchy, and human resource practices
in our workplace.
For example, I asked Bo and Gladys to describe the situation from the
other people’s perspectives in order to gain some insight about their mindsets. Bo explained that Timothy had always been slightly resentful and
jealous of his income because he earned substantially less than Bo did. Bo
assumed he felt entitled to borrow money from him because Bo could afford
it, and therefore, Timothy saw no urgency to pay him back. Bo indicated that
Timothy spent hundreds of dollars a week going out so that he certainly
could afford to pay him back, even if it were at the rate of a few hundred
dollars a month. And Gladys told me that her clients were hoping to launch a
minor redesign of their website in the near future and that they were unlikely
to shop around for an entirely new Web designer unless they absolutely had
to.
Examples of other kinds of information gathering we might do include
finding out what human resource channels are available if we have a
complaint about a work colleague, looking up relevant departments in our
municipality so we know who to call about a missing stop sign on our street,

finding out who in our cell phone company is authorized to deal with the
dollar amount we’re disputing (most customer service representatives are
only authorized to deal with small amounts), or inquiring whether our
teenager has an exam the next day before we demand he spend the rest of the
evening completing his chores.
Once we’ve gathered the necessary information, we need to formulate and
think through our plan of action and anticipate any reactions. For example,
we might want to figure out how we can ask a friend why she hasn’t returned
our phone calls without sounding too accusatory or hostile (because even
though we might feel hurt by her disappearing, being accusatory simply
wouldn’t be productive) or how to phrase a complaint to our spouse so he
doesn’t get too defensive (because even though we might have the right to be
annoyed, we also know he doesn’t respond well when we approach him in
anger). We might think through the best time and place to talk to a colleague
about why he never gave us credit for our part in the team presentation and
give careful consideration to what we want to achieve by doing so (e.g.,
rather than just venting frustration we can suggest that we should take the
lead on the next presentation as compensation for his omission).

Practice, Patience, and Persistence
Personal empowerment is a process and not something we attain in a single
step. We have to be prepared for the reality that not all our efforts will yield
immediate results and that we’ll need to persist, practice our skill sets, and
sharpen our tools before we’re able to wield them both effectively and
consistently. Bo’s first plan to talk to Timothy at a social gathering failed
because Timothy promised to chat later in the evening and then claimed he
was too tired to do so. Bo learned that he needed to create the space to talk
with Timothy without distractions and that he would have to be on the alert
for any attempts Timothy made to prevent the conversation from happening.
When Gladys finally called her clients about the extra work they expected
her to do, they steamrolled her, barely let her get a word in, and reassured
her it wouldn’t take her long to make the tweaks they required. Gladys was
extremely demoralized at first but once she reflected on the exchange, she
realized the best way for her to convey her message was via e-mail, as her
clients would not be able to cut her off and she would be able to express her

thoughts fully and assertively.
Practice, patience, and persistence are key ingredients in developing
personal empowerment. Once we begin speaking up, we will be able to
assess our strengths and weaknesses and learn which of our skills and tools
still need work. Each setback will also teach us how to devise more effective
plans. Bo decided to propose a manageable payment schedule and send it to
Timothy in the mail along with self-addressed stamped envelopes. The
factual and nonaccusatory tone Bo used in his letter led Timothy to respond
with an apology and a check for the first payment. Gladys continued
communicating with her clients by e-mail until she extracted additional
payment for the work they wanted her to do.
While both Bo and Gladys were elated by their successes and felt quite
empowered as a result, their triumphs were only the first step on their
respective paths to stronger self-esteem. Over the next year, Bo continued to
“clean house” with his old friends, and he made new ones who were more
supportive and loyal. Gladys formulated tighter guidelines for compensation
that she distributed to all her clients before she agreed to start work. In time,
her self-esteem improved to the point where she felt able to start dating.
Although she had made no efforts to improve her self-esteem in the dating
domain, feeling more empowered as a businesswoman had created a greater
sense of self-worth that boosted her feelings of confidence in her personal
life as well.
Once we’ve tackled the first item on our lists and met with success, we
should use the boost we get to our self-esteem and turn to the next item as
soon as possible so we find success there as well. Although it will take time
for our emotional immune systems to strengthen and to function more
effectively, our small successes will soon begin to add up. Receiving a raise
or promotion at work, resolving conflicts with friends, working out problems
with our partners and family members, and getting satisfaction as consumers
will each contribute to significantly strengthening our self-esteem and
improving our general quality of life.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: PERSONAL EMPOWERMENT
Dosage: Apply the treatment in each of the different spheres of your life
when possible (i.e., your home and work life, your friendships, and as a
consumer and community member) and repeat until you complete your

list. Add new items to your action list when they arise.

Effective for: Increasing feelings of assertiveness and competence,
strengthening weak feelings of entitlement, and demonstrating personal
empowerment.

Secondary benefits: Increases emotional resilience and general self-esteem
and decreases emotional vulnerability.

Treatment E: Improve Your Self-Control
Demonstrating self-control and willpower increases personal empowerment
and helps us make progress toward our goals, both of which are extremely
beneficial to our self-esteem. Although many of us assume willpower is a
stable character trait or ability (i.e., we either have strong willpower or we
do not), self-control actually functions more like a muscle. As such, learning
how this muscle functions will allow us to use it wisely, strengthen it, and
build our self-esteem as a result.
The most important thing to keep in mind about our self-control muscles is
that they are subject to fatigue. Some of us might have bigger willpower
muscles than others but even the most bulging willpower muscle will tire and
become ineffective if we overwork it. Further, using this muscle in one
context will tire it and make it weaker when we try to use it in another. For
example, if we spend our day squelching the urge to rip off our tyrannical
boss’s hairpiece and throw it across the conference room like a Frisbee, our
willpower will be depleted by the time we get home and we are likely to find
it difficult to stick to our diet and eat a healthy dinner.
Complicating matters further, the limited reservoir of emotional energy
that fuels our willpower muscles is shared by other complex mental functions
such as those responsible for making choices and decisions. Strange as it
might sound, using these seemingly unrelated intellectual abilities saps our
willpower and weakens our self-control. For example, when we spend the
day making decisions about clothing and accessories for an upcoming photo
shoot we’re styling, we might find it challenging to marshal the willpower to
go to the gym when we get home. Indeed, our self-control often fails us at

night after the energy reservoir fueling our willpower runs low and causes it
to function less effectively.
In order to maximize the effectiveness of our willpower and use it to build
our self-esteem we need to do three things: strengthen our basic willpower
muscles, manage the energy reservoirs that fuel our self-control so they don’t
get depleted, and minimize the impact of the many temptations that exist
around us.

Pump Up Your Willpower Muscles
The downside of our willpower being a general muscle is that exerting
willpower in one area will cause fatigue and make it harder to exert
willpower in another. But this “limitation” has an upside. Exercising our
willpower by practicing acts of self-control in insignificant areas will
increase the strength and endurance of our willpower muscles in more
meaningful and important areas as well. Scientists have investigated several
such “willpower workouts,” including focusing on our posture (great for
slouchers); avoiding cursing (more effective for potty mouths than it is for
the “gosh darn it!” set); avoiding sweets, cookies, or cakes (great if you have
a sweet tooth); squeezing a handgrip twice a day for as long as we can
(handgrips are cheap and can be found in sporting goods stores); and the one
I think works best—using our nondominant hand.
Practicing any task that requires us to regularly inhibit an automatic
impulse (e.g., to slouch, use our dominant hand, curse, eat sweets, or let go
of the handgrip when it becomes difficult) can be effective if we “train” for a
sufficient period of time (at least four to eight weeks). In a variety of studies,
such exercises provided significant benefits for smokers who were trying to
quit, people with aggressive impulses who struggled to manage their anger,
and compulsive shoppers who were trying to reform.

Exercise for Building Willpower
Use your nondominant hand for as many tasks as possible every day between
the hours of 8:00a.m. and 6:00p.m. for four to eight weeks (the longer the
better). Adjust these hours accordingly if your schedule requires (e.g., if you
work the night shift or if you only wake up around noon). Include tasks such
as brushing your teeth, opening doors, using a computer mouse or trackball,

drinking (other than hot drinks, which can spill and cause burns), carrying
things (other than babies and other breakables), stirring, combing your hair,
using a fork (when you’re not using a knife), moving objects (other than
breakable ones), and any other action for which you typically use your
dominant hand.
If you are ambidextrous: Use the posture improvement exercise instead.
Monitor your posture so that you are sitting as erect as possible at all times.
Avoid slouching, lying down, reclining, or leaning on a desk during the hours
of 8:00a.m. to 6:00p.m. (adjust the hours accordingly if necessary).

Make Sure You Have Fuel in the Tank
One of the most essential fuels our willpower muscles require (as do many of
our other muscles, both cognitive and physical) is glucose (sugars).
Scientists have known for a while that when our glucose levels are low,
effortful mental processes such as asserting willpower and self-control are
impaired (automatic and noneffortful processes such as washing the dishes
are not). In one study, people were put through effortful mental exercises to
deplete their brain of glucose levels and then given a glass of lemonade. Half
of them received lemonade sweetened with sugar and half got lemonade with
an artificial sweetener (which tastes similar but has no glucose). After fifteen
minutes (the time necessary for the drink to get absorbed into their systems)
subjects who were given lemonade with real sugar recovered from their
mental fatigue and were able to display significantly greater willpower than
those who drank lemonade with artificial sweetener.
In short, for our willpower to operate best we require optimal levels of
glucose. Previous exertions of self-control or lack of caloric intake will make
our blood glucose levels drop below optimal levels and our willpower will be
weak as a result. Sleep and rest also have a big impact on our willpower’s
ability to function at its capacity and being tired or sleep deprived will cause
serious impairments in our ability to exhibit self-control.

Avoid Temptations and Manage Them When You Cannot
The average person spends three to four hours a day exerting some form of
willpower. Dieters are surrounded by fattening foods, smokers trying to quit
walk by people smoking outside most buildings, problem drinkers are never

far from a bar or liquor store, students studying for finals face innumerable
distractions from friends and electronic devices, and individuals with anger
management issues encounter frustrating and provocative situations daily.
The best way to manage temptations is not to overestimate our ability to
manage them but to avoid them when possible. But there are also techniques
we can use when it is impossible to do so.

1. Play One Side of Your Brain Against the Other
Our brain uses different systems to process rewards and risks. When faced
with temptations, the reward system (go for it!) can drown out the system
that evaluates risk (don’t!). While we can’t lower the volume on our cravings
and urgings in such situations, we can turn up the volume on our risk
assessment. For example, if we’re trying to quit drinking and we find
ourselves at a dinner where alcohol is served we can remind ourselves that
the last time we had a drink we made a royal mess of things because we
never stop at just one. We can consider how demoralized we’ll feel if we
allow alcohol back into our lives and how empowered and thankful we’ll feel
the next day if we resist. We can replay snapshots of our spouse’s face the
last time we fell off the wagon and see the disappointment in the eyes of our
friends, or we can remind ourselves of our commitment, of why we started
our journey in the first place, and the reasons we’ve been able to resist our
urges so far. Beefing up our risk assessments by preparing a list of them in
advance, which we can then refer to in the moment, can buy us just enough
time to get through the situation.

2. Minimize the Damage
Many of us become extremely demoralized when we slip and succumb to
temptation. “I’ve fallen off the wagon” or “I’ve blown my diet” is a thought
that serves no useful purpose other than to give ourselves permission to
indulge. After all, if we’ve blown our diet, we might as well eat whatever we
want because we’ll have to start all over again anyway.
Viewing slips as simple alerts that our willpower is fatigued and needs to
recover (instead of as indications of failure) will allow us to acknowledge the
lapse without getting further off track.

3. Avoid the Triggers
Many of our bad habits are prompted by triggers. For example, researchers in
one study gave moviegoers stale popcorn and sat them down to watch a
movie. They ate just as much of the stale popcorn as they typically ate fresh
popcorn—but only because they were watching a movie! When the
researchers gave the same participants stale popcorn while watching a music
video in a conference room, they barely touched it. Our habits always have
triggers, such as lighting up a cigarette when we have a beer, doing
recreational drugs when we hang out with certain friends, or biting our
fingernails when we sit on the couch to watch television. If we wish to
change the habits, we have to avoid the triggers, at least until the new habit
becomes well engrained. Sad as it may be, we might have to skip the beers,
avoid the drug-using friends (which is not a bad idea in general), or watch
TV on a laptop in the kitchen.

4. Practice Mindfulness to Tolerate Urges, Impulses, and Cravings
Mindfulness involves a form of mediation in which we observe our feelings
without judging them, in essence becoming anthropologists in our own
minds. We act like outside observers, noting the strength of our emotions and
the sensations they create in our bodies but without dwelling on them or their
implications. Rudy, the stressed-out gambler who was in danger of gambling
away his aging parents’ home, had an extremely stressful job that sapped his
willpower and made it difficult for him to resist the urge to gamble. I
suggested Rudy use a mindfulness technique, not just because it is effective
for general stress management but because certain mindfulness exercises can
be extremely useful for managing cravings, impulses, and urges (including
the urge to gamble).
When learning to manage our cravings and urges we must first accept that
such impulses, strong as they are, always pass with time. I suggested Rudy
use one of our sessions to practice and instructed him to do the following:
“Relax and focus on your breathing. Feel free to close your eyes. Study the
urge to gamble as its waves wash over you, as if you were an alien who was
interested in the human experience.” (Rudy was a sci-fi fan.) “Visualize the
amplitude of the urge’s intensity like a seismograph readout that measures
earthquake activity. As the waves come, follow the rise and fall of the dial on
the readout; note when one wave intensifies and weakens and where another

begins. Observe how different parts of your body feel when the urge
intensifies and how the same parts of your body feel when it subsides.
Continue to monitor your physiological responses this way, tracking one
wave of urges after another as they rush toward you and over you, until the
intensity of the waves eventually subsides as every earthquake does.”
Focusing on our breathing, visualizing the seismographic readout, and
noting the sensations in our bodies can help us ride out the “quake” and
resist acting on our cravings, urges, and impulses until they pass. Practicing
this technique when we are not in the grips of our impulses will help us
apply it more successfully when we are. Fortunately, Rudy was able to get in
several weeks of daily mindfulness practice before the work stress subsided
again and the urge to gamble swept in. When it did, Rudy was ready for it
and he was able to ride it out. He described the situation as “touch-and-go for
a while,” but the confidence he gained by resisting the urge to gamble when
he had succumbed to it many times in the past provided a huge boost to his
self-esteem.

TREATMENT SUMMARY: IMPROVE YOUR SELF-CONTROL
Dosage: Apply this treatment daily toward goals that require willpower
and self-control.

Effective for: Increasing willpower and feelings of empowerment,
facilitating progress toward self-improvement goals, and boosting selfesteem.

When to Consult a Mental Health Professional
Self-esteem is a deeply rooted psychological construct and applying the
treatments in this chapter such that they yield significant results requires
time, effort, and dedication. If you feel unable to apply these techniques or if
you’ve invested the time and effort to do so but have not been able to boost
your self-esteem as a result, you should consider seeking the advice of a
mental health professional.
If there are ongoing circumstances in your life that are contributing to your
low self-esteem (e.g., if you have an emotionally abusive boss or partner or

if you’re struggling to find work despite making consistent efforts to do so),
a mental health professional could help you assess whether you should take
steps to change your circumstances (as it is hard to rebuild your self-esteem
if it is still actively “bleeding”). Finally, if your self-esteem feels so damaged
that you have thoughts of harming yourself or others in any way, seek
immediate help from a mental health professional or go to the nearest
emergency room.

CONCLUSION
Create Your Personal Psychological Medicine Cabinet
We sustain frequent psychological wounds as we go through life.
Unfortunately, until now, few of us have had the awareness and the knowhow to treat them effectively. Instead we tend either to ignore them entirely
or to unwittingly react in ways that deepen them and allow them to cause
damage to our mental health over time. The treatments in this book (all of
which are based on current research by experts in the field) represent a
psychological medicine cabinet starter kit, a set of emotional balms,
ointments, bandages, and painkillers that we can apply to emotional and
psychological injuries when we first sustain them.
However, being a good self-practitioner means developing our own
individualized set of mental-health-hygiene guidelines and you should
endeavor to personalize your medicine cabinet whenever possible. Although
we all sustain psychological injuries when faced with events such as loss,
failure, or rejection, the extent of our wounds and the emotional first aid
treatments to which they respond best can vary from person to person. The
same is true when it comes to the pills and treatments we use to treat our
phyical ills. For example, there are numerous over-the-counter pain relievers
from which we can choose to treat headaches, backaches, relievers from
which we can choose to treat headaches, backaches, and general pain, but we
rarely stock all of them in our homes. Trial and error teaches us that one
specific brand of pain reliever works better for us than others do and that is
the one we are likely to have on hand.
Similarly, you might find that some of the emotional first aid treatments in
this book are more effective for your individual psychological makeup than
others. Or you might find that a specific treatment works best for you in
some situations but that in a different set of circumstances it is more
effective to apply another. Taking note of such things will help you refine
your choices when applying emotional first aid techniques and make your
future efforts more effective.
Psychology is a young science and one in which new approaches and

treatments are continually being discovered and updated. That being said, the
suggestions in this book are based on sound and fundamental assumptions
about psychology and mental health that are unlikely to be radically revised
in their entirety. Even if we find a cure for the common cold, neglecting to
treat a cold when we first experience symptoms of one will always put us at
risk for developing a more severe respiratory illness such as pneumonia.
Similarly, even if we discover more effective strategies for dealing with a
psychological injury such as failure, neglecting the psychological wounds
failure inflicts will always risk damage to our mental health, self-esteem, and
emotional well-being. Therefore, although the contents of our psychological
medicine cabinet might need to be updated at some point in the future,
having one and using it regularly will always be necessary and beneficial.
It is my sincere hope that prioritizing our mental health and taking the
steps necessary to enhance and maintain it will become a daily practice, a
habit we all integrate into our lives from an early age. Teaching our children
to practice mental health hygiene and instructing them on how to apply the
principles of emotional first aid can have an extraordinary impact on their
lives and on society at large. All it would take is for the practice of mental
health hygiene to become as ubiquitous as the practice of dental hygiene is
today, and we could witness, in our lifetimes, a new generation of
emotionally resilient and psychologically sophisticated people who confront
life’s hardships with both strength and resolve, who recover from them
rapidly and more completely, and who enjoy far greater happiness and life
satisfaction than the average person does today.
If such notions seem foolish or romantic, consider that the goal of leading
happy and satisfying lives was one few people even considered several
generations ago. Most people were too busy struggling to fulfill basic needs
such as food, shelter, and survival to worry about whether they were happy.
Perhaps several generations from now, our descendants too will look back at
us and marvel at how we took better care of our teeth than we did our minds,
of how few of us thought to apply emotional first aid techniques when we
sustained common psychological injuries.
Of course, until now, we’ve lacked the resources and the know-how to
adopt such general practices and we’ve been unable to create a revolution in
how we think about and care for our mental health and emotional well-being
on a large scale. But we are limited no longer. Anyone who wishes to lead an

emotionally healthier and happier life need only open his or her
psychological medicine cabinet and reach for the treatments within.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
For years, I lamented how advances in psychological science would go
ignored because cutting-edge research is buried in professional journals and
has little impact on the day-to-day life of the average person. I bemoaned
how we marginalized emotionally damaging experiences when there was so
much we could do to treat them. And I expressed repeated exasperation that
we took better care of our teeth than we did our minds and our mental health.
Not that I have anything against dental hygiene. I love teeth. I simply felt
there was something wrong about the fact that we know so much about
brushing and flossing and so little about how to take care of our emotions
and our psychological well-being.
Fortunately, two people decided to do something about it. And by “it” I
mean my incessant whining about this subject. My agent, Michelle Tessler,
and my brother and colleague, Dr. Gil Winch, suggested (more like insisted)
I follow the very advice I championed in my first book, The Squeaky Wheel,
and replace my ineffective complaining with constructive action. “Write a
book!” they said. “Distill the information and tell people what they need to
know!” they said. So I did. Of course, their duties did not end there, as their
encouragement and support was invaluable throughout. Michelle Tessler is
truly an amazing agent and I am incredibly fortunate to work with her. My
brother Gil, who is also my identical twin, loves, supports, encourages,
motivates, and inspires me every day. He has always been the first to read
and comment on every word I write, and I could not have written this book
without him.
My editors at Hudson Street Press, Caroline Sutton and Brittney Ross,
have been enthusiastic, responsive, and supportive from the very inception of
this project when Caroline pushed me to find the right frame for the book.
Every suggestion they made has been spot-on and their editorial comments
have been straightforward, useful, and extremely constructive.
My readers invested a great amount of time and effort to make comments
and suggestions that significantly improved the manuscript. I am extremely
grateful to Maayan Klein, Yael Merkel, and my dear colleague Dr. Jennifer
Hofert for their invaluable professional perspectives. Richard Leff, Frank

Anderson, James A. Barraclough, and especially Danny Klein had
wonderfully useful and well-organized suggestions. Jessica Rackman went
above and beyond the call of duty and took time out of her incredibly busy
schedule to give page-by-page comments that were insightful, encouraging,
and incredibly helpful as always.
I would like to thank my family and close friends for being enthusiastic,
supportive, and extremely patient as I worked on the book, and especially for
tolerating me responding to their phone calls and texts with “Writing, can’t
talk,” for so many months.
I owe much to my patients who were willing to try new techniques and
emotional first aid treatments when I suggested them, who provided useful
and insightful feedback about the work we were doing, and whose openness,
trust, hard work, and dedication to their own mental health and emotional
well-being I deeply appreciate and respect. I disguised the names and
identifying information of people I used as case studies but you know who
you are and I’m incredibly grateful to you for serving as examples to me and
hopefully to many readers for how employing emotional first aid treatments
can truly help us heal, grow, and better our lives in every way.

NOTES
Chapter 1: Rejection
But when psychologists investigated this very situation: K.D. Williams,
“Ostracism,” Annual Review of Psychology 28 (2007):425–52.
when psychologists asked people to compare the pain of rejection: Ibid.;
Z. Chen, K.D. Williams, J. Fitness, and N.C. Newton, “When hurt will not
heal: Exploring the capacity to relive social and physical pain,”
Psychological Science 19 (2008):789–95.
The answer lies in our evolutionary past: G. MacDonald and M.R. Leary,
“Why does social exclusion hurt? The relationship between social and
physical pain,” Psychology Bulletin 131 (2005):202–23.
brains developed an early-warning system: K.D. Williams and L. Zadro,
“Ostracism: The indiscriminate early detection system,” in The Social
Outcast: Ostracism, Social Exclusion, Rejection, and Bullying, edited by
K.D. Williams and W. Von Hippel (New York: Psychology Press, 2005), 19–
34.
the very same brain regions get activated when we experience rejection:
N.I. Eisenberger, M.D. Lieberman, and K.D. Williams, “Does rejection hurt?
An fMRI study of social exclusion,” Science 302 (2003):290–92.
when scientists give people acetaminophen (Tylenol): N.C. DeWall, G.
McDonald, G.D. Webster, C.L. Masten, R.F. Baumeister, C. Powell, D.
Combs, D.R. Schurtz, T.F. Stillman, D.M. Tice, and N.L. Eisenberger,
“Acetaminophen reduces social pain,” Psychological Science 21 (2010):931–
37.
finding out the rejection wasn’t even “real”: L. Zadro, K.D. Williams, and
R. Richardson, “How low can you go? Ostracism by a computer lowers
belonging, control, self-esteem, and meaningful existence,” Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology 40 (2004):560–67.
people who’d excluded them were members of the Ku Klux Klan: K.
Gonsalkorale and K.D. Williams, “The KKK won’t let me play: Ostracism
even by a despised outgroup hurts,” European Journal of Social Psychology

37 (2007):1176–86.
replacing the cyber ball with an animated cyber bomb: I. Van Beest, K.D.
Williams, and E. Van Dijk, “Cyberbomb: Effects of being ostracized from a
death game,” Group Processes and Intergroup Relations (2011):1–16.
Rejections impact our ability to use sound logic: R.F. Baumeister, J.M.
Twenge, and C.K. Nuss, “Effects of social exclusion on cognitive processes:
Anticipated aloneness reduces intelligent thought,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 83 (2002):817–27; R.F. Baumeister and C.N. DeWall,
“Inner disruption following social exclusion: Reduced intelligent thought and
self-regulation failure,” in The Social Outcast: Ostracism, Social Exclusion,
Rejection, and Bullying, edited by K.D. Williams and W. Von Hippel (New
York: Psychology Press, 2005), 53–73.
Rejections often trigger anger and aggressive impulses: M.R. Leary, J.M.
Twenge, and E. Quinlivan, “Interpersonal rejection as a determinant of anger
and aggression,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 10 (2006):111–
32.
In 2001 the office of the surgeon general of the United States issued a
report: Office of the Surgeon General 2001 Youth Violence: A report of the
Surgeon General, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.http://www.mentalhealth.org/youthviolence/default.asp.
also play a huge role in violence between romantic partners: G.W.
Barnard, H. Vera, M.I. Vera, and G. Newman, “Till death do us part: A study
of spouse murder,” Bulletin of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the
Law 10 (1982):271–80.
Studies of school shootings: M.R. Leary, R.M. Kowalski, L. Smith, and S.
Phillips, “Teasing, rejection, and violence: Case studies of the school
shootings,” Aggressive Behavior 29 (2003):202–14.
In fact, the mere act of recalling a previous rejection: L. Vande-velde and
M. Miyahara, “Impact of group rejections from a physical activity on
physical self-esteem among university students,” Social Psychology of
Education 8 (2005):65–81.
we are wired with a fundamental need to feel accepted by others: R.F.
Baumeister and M.R. Leary, “The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal
attachments as a fundamental human motivation,” Psychological Bulletin
117 (1995):497–529.

One aspect receiving increased attention from scientists: N.L. Penhaligon,
W.R. Louis, and S.L.D. Restubog, “Emotional anguish at work: The
mediating role of perceived rejection on workgroup mistreatment and
affective outcomes,” Journal of Occupational Health Psychology 14
(2009):34–45.
One of the best ways to mitigate the hurt rejection causes: D.K. Sherman
and G.L. Cohen, “The psychology of self-defense: Self-affirmation theory,”
i n Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol.38, edited by M.P.
Zanna (San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2006):183–242.
In one study, even a brief exchange with a friendly experimenter: J.M.
Twenge, L. Zhang, K.R. Catanese, B. Dolan-Pascoe, L.F. Lyche, and R.F.
Baumeister, “Replenishing connectedness: Reminders of social activity
reduce aggression after social exclusion,” British Journal of Social
Psychology 46 (2007):205–24.
In another, instant messaging online with an unfamiliar peer: E.F. Gross,
“Logging on, bouncing back: An experimental investigation of online
communication following social exclusion,” Developmental Psychology 45
(2009):1787–93.
Estimating visceral and physical pain: N.L. Nordgren, K. Banas, and G.
MacDonald, “Empathy gaps for social pain: Why people underestimate the
pain of social suffering,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 100
(2011):120–28.
A recent and compelling study found that teachers: Ibid.
Seeking support from members of our group after being the target of
discrimination: S. Noh and V. Kasper, “Perceived discrimination and
depression: Moderating effects of coping, acculturation, and ethnic support,”
American Journal of Public Health 93 (2003):232–38.
Cancer patients and those with other illnesses: S.E. Taylor, R.L. Falke, S.J.
Shoptaw, and R.R. Lichtman, “Social support, support groups, and the cancer
patient,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 54 (1986):608–15.
Social snacking: W.L. Gardner, C.L. Pickett, and M. Knowles, “Social
snacking and shielding: Using social symbols, selves, and surrogates in the
service of belonging needs,” in The Social Outcast: Ostracism, Social
Exclusion, Rejection, and Bullying, edited by K.D. Williams and W. Von
Hippel (New York: Psychology Press, 2005), 227–42.

Chapter 2: Loneliness
The
2010
U.S.
Census:
http://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/families_households/cb10174.html.
What determines our loneliness is not the quantity of our relationships:
J.T. Cacioppo and L.C. Hawkley, “People thinking about people: The vicious
cycle of being a social outcast in one’s own mind,” in The Social Outcast:
Ostracism, Social Exclusion, Rejection, and Bullying, edited by K.D.
Williams and W. Von Hippel (New York: Psychology Press, 2005), 91–108.
it is also associated with clinical depression, suicidal thoughts: C.M. Masi,
H. Chen, L.C. Hawkley, and J.T. Cacioppo, “A meta-analysis of interventions
to reduce loneliness,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 15(3)
(2011):219–66.
More important, loneliness has an alarming effect on our general health:
Ibid.
otherwise healthy college students: S.D. Pressman, S. Cohen, G.E. Miller,
A. Barkin, and B. Rabin, “Loneliness, social network size, and immune
response to influenza vaccination in college freshmen,” Health Psychology,
24(3) (2005):297–306.
just as large a risk factor for our long-term physical health as cigarette
smoking: J. Holt-Lunstad, T.B. Smith, and J.B. Layton, “Social relationships
and mortality risk: A meta-analytic review,” Public Library of Science
Medicine 7 (2010):1–20.
loneliness is contagious: J.T. Cacioppo, J.H. Fowler, and N.A. Christakis,
“Alone in the crowd: The structure and spread of loneliness in a large social
network,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 97 (2009):977–91
Over 40 percent of adults will suffer from loneliness in their lifetime: L.C.
Hawkley and J.T. Cacioppo, “Loneliness matters: A theoretical and empirical
review of consequences and mechanisms,” Annals of Behavioral Medicine 40
(2010):218–27.
simply asking college students to recall a time in their life when they felt
lonely: R.F. Baumeister, J.M. Twenge, and C.K. Nuss, “Effects of social
exclusion on cognitive processes: Anticipated aloneness reduces intelligent
thought,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 83 (2002):817–27.
Another study videotaped students as they interacted with a friend: S.

Duck, K. Pond, and G. Leatham, “Loneliness and the evaluation of relational
events,” Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 11 (1994):253–76.
lonely people are easily recognizable to others: K.J. Rotenberg and J.
Kmill, “Perception of lonely and non-lonely persons as a function of
individual differences in loneliness,” Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships 9 (1992):325–30.
Lonely people are often seen as less attractive: S. Lau and G.E. Gruen,
“The social stigma of loneliness: Effect of target person’s and perceiver’s
sex,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 18 (1992):182–89.
physical attractiveness provides no immunity: J.T. Cacioppo and L.C.
Hawkley, “People thinking about people: The vicious cycle of being a social
outcast in one’s own mind,” in The Social Outcast: Ostracism, Social
Exclusion, Rejection, and Bullying, edited by K.D. Williams and W. Von
Hippel (New York: Psychology Press, 2005), 91–108.
loneliness also drives us into cycles of self-protection: Ibid.
The following three errors are the most important: N. Epley and E.M.
Caruso, “Perspective taking: Misstepping into others’ shoes,” in Handbook of
Imagination and Mental Simulation, edited by K.D. Markman, W.M.P. Klein,
and J.A. Suhr (New York: Psychology Press, 2009) 295–309.
we typically give almost exclusive priority to whether we find the joke
funny: Ibid.
sincere versus sarcastic phone messages: N. Eply, C. Morewedge, and B.
Keysar, “Perspective taking as egocentric anchoring and adjustment,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 87 (2004):327–39.
Once we consider how this dynamic might play out in gift-giving
scenarios: D. Lerouge and L. Warlop, “Why is it so hard to predict our
partner’s product preferences: The effects of target familiarity on prediction
accuracy,” Journal of Consumer Research 33 (2006):393–402.
Unfortunately, it is the couple’s very familiarity: W.B. Swann and M.J.
Gill, “Confidence and accuracy in person perception: Do we know what we
think we know about our relationship partners?” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 73 (1997):747–57.
Women should give men the space and leeway to express their thoughts: J.
Flora and C. Segrin, “Affect and behavioral involvement in spousal
complaints and compliments,” Journal of Family Psychology 14 (000):641–

57.
Surveys of college students: S.H. Konrath, E.H. O’Brien, and C. Hsing,
“Changes in dispositional empathy in American college students over time: A
meta-analysis,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 15 (2011):180–
98.
The Internet allows us to connect to people: T. Fokkema and K.
Knipscheer, “Escape loneliness by going digital: A quantitative and
qualitative evaluation of a Dutch experiment in using ECT to overcome
loneliness among older adults,” Aging and Mental Health 11 (2007):496–
504.
online dating is now the second most common way couples meet: E.J.
Finkel, P.W. Eastwick, B.R. Karney, H.T. Reis, and S. Sprecher, “Online
dating: A critical analysis from the perspective of psychological science,”
Psychological Science in the Public Interest 13 (2012):3–66.
Helping others reduces feelings of loneliness: M. Cattan, N. Kime, and M.
Bagnall, “The use of telephone befriending in low level support for socially
isolated older people–an evaluation,” Health and Social Care in the
Community 19 (2011):198–206.
Those who spent time alone with a dog: M.R. Banks and W.A. Banks,
“The effects of group and individual animal-assisted therapy on loneliness in
residents of long-term care facilities,” Anthrozoos 18 (2005):396–408;
interview with the study’s author: http://www.slu.edu/readstory/more/6391.

Chapter 3: Loss and Trauma
a phenomenon known as posttraumatic growth: R.G. Tedeschi and L.G.
Calhoun, “Posttraumatic growth: Conceptual foundations and empirical
evidence,” Psychological Inquiry 15 (2004):1–18.
We often move past the most acute stages of grief and adjustment after six
months: J.M. Holland, J.M. Currier, and R.A. Neimeyer, “Meaning
reconstruction in the first two years of bereavement: The role of sensemaking and benefit-finding,” Omega 53 (2006):175–91.
The challenge of redefining ourselves: R.A. Neimeyer, “Restorying loss:
Fostering growth in the posttraumatic narrative,” in Handbook of
Posttraumatic Growth: Research and Practice, edited by L. Calhoun and R.

Tedeschi (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2006), 68–80.
loss and trauma can challenge our basic assumptions about the world: R.
Janoff-Bulman and C.M. Frantz, “The impact of trauma on meaning: From
meaningless world to meaningful life,” in The Transformation of Meaning in
Psychological Therapies: Integrating Theory and Practice, edited by M.
Power and C.R. Brewin (Sussex, England: Wiley, 1997), 91–106.
Yet, the sooner we reconstruct our worldviews: Ibid.
Indeed, a wave of recent research has demonstrated that many of our most
cherished notions ... the five stages of grief: J.M. Holland and R.A.
Neimeyer, “An examination of stage theory of grief among individuals
bereaved by natural and violent causes: A meaning-oriented contribution,”
Omega 61 (2010):103–20.
Specifically, the mere act of recalling an event changes our actual
memory: see Jonah Lehrer’s article from February 2012 in
Wired:http://www.wired.com/magazine/2012/02/ff_forgettingpill/all/1.
there is no “right” way to cope with the aftermath of loss and trauma:
M.D. Seery, R.C. Silver, E.A. Holman, W.A. Ence, and T.Q. Chu,
“Expressing thoughts and feelings following a collective trauma: Immediate
responses to 9/11 predict negative outcomes in a national sample,” Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 76 (2008):657–67.
One online study began following over two thousand people in, as it
happened, August 2001: Ibid.
Finding meaning was a crucial factor in recovery: L.C. Park, “Making
sense of the meaning literature: An integrative review of meaning making
and its effects on adjustment to stressful life events,” Psychological Bulletin
136 (2010):257–301.
Scientists who examined how people go about finding meaning: J.M.
Holland, J.M. Currier, R.A. Neimeyer, “Meaning reconstruction in the first
two years of bereavement: The role of sense-making and benefit-finding,”
Omega 53 (2006):175–91.
Specifically, numerous studies demonstrate that asking ourselves why
events happened: O. Ayduk and E. Kross, “From a distance: Implications of
spontaneous self-distancing for adaptive self-reflection,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 98 (2010):809–29.
Rather than eliciting a sense of randomness: L.J. Kray, L.G. George, K.A.

Liljenquist, A.D. Galinsky, P.E. Tetlock, and N.J. Roese, “From what might
have been to what must have been: Counterfactual thinking creates
meaning,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 98 (2011):106–18.
it is the real-world application of these benefits: S.E. Hobfoll, B.J. Hall, D.
Canetti-Nisim, S. Galea, R.J. Johnson, and P.A. Palmieri, “Refining our
understanding of traumatic growth in the face of terrorism: Moving from
meaning cognitions to doing what is meaningful,” Applied Psychology: An
International Review 56 (2006):345–66.

Chapter 4: Guilt
Studies estimate that people experience roughly two hours a day of mild
guilt: R.F. Baumeister, H.T. Reis, and P.A.E.G. Delespaul, “Subjective and
experimental correlates of guilt in daily life,” Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 21 (1995):1256–68.
Indeed, guilt’s primary function is to signal to us: Ibid.
Rather, unhealthy guilt occurs primarily in situations involving our
relationships: R.F. Baumeister, A.M. Stillwell, and T.F. Heatherton, “Guilt:
An interpersonal approach,” Psychological Bulletin 115 (1994):243–67.
we’re much less skilled at rendering effective apologies: R. Fehr and M.J.
Gelfand, “When apologies work: How matching apology components to
victims’ self-construals facilitates forgiveness,” Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes 113 (2010):37–50.
Guilt makes many of us experience mental and intellectual disruptions:
M.J.A. Wohl, T.A. Pychyl, and S.H. Bennett, “I forgive myself, now I can
study: How self-forgiveness for procrastinating can reduce future
procrastination,” Personality and Individual Differences 48 (2010):803–8.
In one study involving regular college students: Y. Zemack-Rugar, J.R.
Bettman, and G.J. Fitzsimons, “The effects of nonconsciously priming
emotion concepts on behavior,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 93 (2007):927–39.
Some of us even resort to punishing ourselves: R.M.A. Nelissen, “Guiltinduced self-punishment as a sign of remorse,” Social Psychological and
Personality Science 3 (2012):139–44.
people who were made to feel guilty by depriving a fellow student of

lottery tickets: Ibid.
keep their hands submerged in freezing water: B. Bastian, J. Jetten, and F.
Fasoli, “Cleansing the soul by hurting the flesh: The guilt-reducing effect of
pain,” Psychological Science 22 (2011):334–35.
known as the Dobby effect: R.M.A. Nelissen and M. Zeelenberg, “When
guilt evokes self-punishment: Evidence for the existence of a Dobby effect,”
Emotion 9 (2009):118–22.
their most common theme is one of interpersonal neglect: R.F. Baumeister,
A.M. Stillwell, and T.F. Heatherton, “Personal narratives about guilt: Role in
action control and interpersonal relationships,” Basic and Applied Social
Psychology 17 (1995):173–98.
In one survey, 33 percent of people indicated they felt resentful: Ibid.
The most effective way to treat unresolved guilt: C.E. Cryder, S. Springer,
and C.K. Morewedge, “Guilty feelings, targeted actions,” Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin 38 (2012):607–18.
this simple transaction of apology and forgiveness goes awry: R. Fehr and
M.J. Gelfand, “When apologies work: How matching apology components to
victims’ self-construals facilitates forgiveness,” Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes 113 (2010):37–50.
Scientists have discovered three additional components: Ibid.
self-forgiveness reduces feelings of guilt: J.H. Hall and F.D. Fincham,
“Self-forgiveness: The stepchild of forgiveness research,” Journal of Social
and Clinical Psychology 24 (2005):621–37.
people who forgave themselves for procrastinating: M.J.A. Wohl, T.A.
Pychyl, and S.H. Bennett, “I forgive myself, now I can study: How selfforgiveness for procrastinating can reduce future procrastination,”
Personality and Individual Differences 48 (2010):803–8.
Studies have found that both atonement and reparations: H. Xu, L. Beue,
and R. Shankland, “Guilt and guiltless: An integrative review,” Social and
Personality Psychology Compass 5 (2011):440–57; J.J. Exline, B.L. Root, S.
Yadavalli, A.M. Martin, and M.L. Fisher, “Reparative behaviors and selfforgiveness: Effects of a laboratory-based exercise,” Self and Identity 10
(2011):101–26.

Chapter 5: Rumination
linked to a wide range of threats to our psychological and physical health: for
a review see S. Nolen-Hoeksema, B.E. Wisco, and S. Lyubomirsky,
“Rethinking
rumination,” Perspectives on Psychological Science 3
(2008)400–424.
Scientists asked regular people on a regular day to reflect: Ibid.
researchers gave college students at risk for depression: G.J. Haeffel,
“When self-help is no help: Traditional cognitive skills training does not
prevent depressive symptoms in people who ruminate,” Behaviour Research
and Therapy 28 (2010):152–57.
Angry feelings activate our stress responses and our cardiovascular
systems: B.J. Bushman, A.M. Bonacci, W.C. Pederson, E.A. Vasquez, and M.
Norman, “Chewing on it can chew you up: Effects of rumination on triggered
displaced aggression,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 88
(2005):969–83.
one study put people through a frustrating experience: Ibid.
Rumination involves such intense brooding: S. Nolen-Hoeksema, B.E.
Wisco, and S. Lyubomirsky, “Rethinking rumination,” Perspectives on
Psychological Science 3 (2008):400–424.
For example, women with strong ruminative tendencies: S. Lyubomirsky,
F. Kasri, O. Chang, and I. Chung, “Ruminative response styles and delay of
seeking diagnosis for breast cancer symptoms,” Journal of Social and
Clinical Psychology 25 (2006):276–304.
Other studies found that cancer and coronary patients with ruminative
tendencies: P. Aymanns, S.H. Filipp, and T. Klauer, “Family support and
coping with cancer: Some determinants and adaptive correlates,” British
Journal of Social Psychology 34 (1995):107–24.
the visual perspective we use when going over painful experiences: O.
Ayduk and E. Kross, “From a distance: Implications of spontaneous selfdistancing for adaptive self-reflection,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 98 (2010):809–29.
In addition, their blood pressure was less reactive: E. Kross and O. Ayduk,
“Facilitating adaptive emotional analysis: Distinguishing distanced-analysis
of depressive experiences from immersed-analysis and distraction,”
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 34 (2008):924–38.

In now-classic experiments: D.M. Wegner, D.J. Schneider, S.R. Carter III,
and T.L. White, “Paradoxical effects of thought suppression,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 53 (1987):5–13.
distraction has proven to be a far more effective weapon: S. NolenHoeksema, B.E. Wisco, and S. Lyubomirsky, “Rethinking rumination,”
Perspectives on Psychological Science 3 (2008):400–424.
imagining the layout of our local supermarket: Ibid.
the verdict of all such studies has been virtually unanimous: B.J.
Bushman, “Does venting anger feed or extinguish the flame? Catharsis,
rumination, distraction, anger, and aggressive responding,” Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin 28 (2002):724–31.
The most effective strategy for regulating emotions such as anger: O.P.
John and J.J. Gross, “Healthy and unhealthy emotion regulation: Personality
processes, individual differences, and lifespan development,” Journal of
Personality 72 (2004):1301–33.
A series of recent studies examined the power of prayer: R.H. Bremner,
S.L. Koole, and B.J. Bushman, “Pray for those who mistreat you: Effects of
prayer on anger and aggression,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
37 (2011):830–37.

Chapter 6: Failure
Participants were asked to kick an American football: J.K. Witt and T.
Dorsch, “Kicking to bigger uprights: Field goal kicking performance
influences perceived size,” Perception 38 (2009):1328–40.
Another common New Year resolution error is goal bingeing: E.J.
Masicampo and R.F. Baumeister, “Consider it done! Plan making can
eliminate the cognitive effects of unfulfilled goals,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 10 (2011):667–83.
Failures sap our confidence, our motivation, and our hope: L.D. Young and
J.M. Allin, “Persistence of learned helplessness in humans,” Journal of
General Psychology 113 (1986):81–88.
Failure can also be very misleading: Ibid.
Test anxiety is especially problematic: R. Hembree, “Correlates, Causes,
Effects, and Treatment of Test Anxiety,” Review of Educational Research 58

(1988):47–77.
consider what happens when girls take math tests: S. Spencer, C.M. Steele,
and D.M. Quinn, “Stereotype threat and women’s math performance,”
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 35 (1999):4–28.
Fear of failure makes many of us engage in all manner of selfhandicapping behaviors: A.J. Martin, H.W. Marsh, and R.L. Debus, “Selfhandicapping and defensive pessimism: A model of self-protection from a
longitudinal
perspective,” Contemporary Educational Psychology 28
(2003):1–36.
Fear of Failure in Families: A.J. Elliot and T.M. Thrash, “The
intergenerational transmission of fear of failure,” Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 30 (2004):957–71.
Choking is based on a similar dynamic: M.S. DeCaro, R.D. Thomas, N.B.
Albert, and S.L. Beilock, “Choking under pressure: Multiple routes to skill
failure,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 140 (2011):390–406.
Further, providing social and emotional support alone: N. Bolger and D.
Amarel, “Effects of social support visibility on adjustment to stress:
Experimental evidence,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92
(2007):458–75.
a surprising aspect about failure: K.M. Sheldon, N. Abad, Y. Ferguson, A.
Gunz, L. Houser-Marko, C.P. Nichols, and S. Lyubomirsky, “Persistent
pursuit of need-satisfying goals leads to increased happiness: A 6-month
experimental longitudinal study,” Motivation and Emotion 34 (2010):39–48.
One study illustrated this point with a group of seniors: C.A. Sarkisian, B.
Weiner, C. Davis, and T.R. Prohaska, “Pilot test of attributional retraining
intervention to raise walking levels in sedentary older adults,” Journal of the
American Geriatric Society 55 (2007):1842–46.
Since it is best to pursue one goal at a time: R. Koestner, N. Lekes, T.A.
Powers, and E. Chicoine, “Attaining personal goals: Self-concordance plus
implementation intentions equals success,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 83 (2002):231–44.
defining your goal in ways that are personally meaningful: R.M. Ryan,
G.C. Williams, H. Patrick, and E. Deci, “Self-determination theory and
physical activity: The dynamics of motivation in development and wellness,”
Hellenic Journal of Psychology 6 (2009):107–24.

For example, asking women intending to get a breast cancer exam: S.
Orbell, S. Hodgkins, and P. Sheeran, “Implementation intentions and the
theory of planned behavior,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 23
(1997):945–54.
In studies, seeing the humor: J. Stoeber and D.P. Janssen, “Perfectionism
and coping with daily failures: Positive reframing helps achieve satisfaction
at the end of the day,” Anxiety, Stress, and Coping 24 (2011):477–97.
Jim Short: http://www.jokes.com/funny/jim+short/jim-short--not-a-loser.
Whistle While You Choke: S. Beilock, Choke: What the Secrets of the
Brain Reveal about Success and Failure at Work and at Play (New York:
Free Press, 2010).
In a series of recent studies, four hundred seventh graders: G.L. Cohen, J.
Garcia, V. Purdie-Vaughns, N. Apfel, and P. Brzustoski, “Recursive processes
in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap,”
Science 324 (2009):400–403.
college women taking physics: A. Miyake, L.E. Kost-Smith, N.D.
Finkelstein, S.J. Pollock, G.L. Cohen, and T.A. Ito, “Reducing the gender
achievement gap in college science: A classroom study of values
affirmation,” Science 330 (2010):1234–37.

Chapter 7: Low Self-Esteem
the overwhelming majority of self-esteem programs simply don’t work: W.B.
Swann, C. Chang-Schneider, and K.L. McClarty, “Do people’s self-views
matter? Self-concept and self-esteem in everyday life,” American
Psychologist 62 (2007):84–94.
Further, people with low self-esteem are often less happy: for a brief
review see K.D. Neff, “Self-compassion, self-esteem, and well-being,”
Social and Personality Psychology Compass 5 (2011):1–12.
Having very high self-esteem has its own set of pitfalls: Ibid.
there has been a general “grade inflation” in our collective self-esteem: N.
Maxwell and J. Lopus, “The Lake Wobegon effect in student self-reported
data,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 84 (1994):201–5.
people with higher self-esteem believe they are more attractive: E. Diener,
B. Wolsic, and F. Fujita, “Physical attractiveness and subjective well-being,”

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 69 (1995):120–29.
people with low self-esteem also rated their own groups negatively: J.
Crocker, and I. Schwartz, “Prejudice and ingroup favoritism in a minimal
intergroup situation: Effects of self-esteem and threat,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 52 (1987):907–16.
how we feel about ourselves in specific domains of our lives: M.
Rosenberg, C. Schooler, C. Schoenbach, and F. Rosenberg, “Global selfesteem and specific self-esteem,” American Sociological Review 60
(1995):141–56.
having high er self-esteem ... can make us more psychologically resilient:
J. Greenberg, S. Solomon, T. Pyszczynski, A. Rosenblatt, J. Burling, D.
Lyon, L. Simon, and E. Pinel, “Why do people need self-esteem? Converging
evidence that self-esteem serves an anxiety-buffering function,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 63 (1992):913–22.
people with low self-esteem experience rejection as more painful: K.
Onoda, Y. Okamoto, K. Nakashima, H. Nittono, S. Yoshimura, S. Yamawaki,
and M. Ura, “Does low self-esteem enhance social pain? The relationship
between trait self-esteem and anterior cingulated cortex activation induced
by ostracism,” Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 5 (2010):385–91.
We are also more vulnerable to failure when our self-esteem is low: J.D.
Brown, “High self-esteem buffers negative feedback: Once more with
feeling,” Cognition and Emotion 24 (2010):1389–1404.
We also respond to stress much less effectively: S.C. Lee-Flynn, G.
Pomaki, A. DeLongis, J.C. Biesanz, and E. Puterman, “Daily cognitive
appraisals, daily affect, and long-term depressive symptoms: The role of selfesteem and self-concept clarity in the stress process,” Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 37 (2011):255–68.
Stress can substantially weaken our willpower: L. Schwabe, O. Höffken,
M. Tegenthoff, and O.T. Wolf, “Preventing the stress-induced shift from
goal-directed to habit action with a β-adrenergic antagonist,” Journal of
Neuroscience 31 (2011):17317–25.
The good news is that manipulations to boost self-esteem: for a review see
S.E. Taylor and A.L. Stanton, “Coping resources, coping processes, and
mental health,” Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 2 (2007):377–401.
low self-esteem limits our ability to benefit from positive ones: R.A.

Josephs, J. Bosson, and C.G. Jacobs, “Self-esteem maintenance processes:
Why low self-esteem may be resistant to change,” Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 29 (2003):920–33.
we believe the program helped us improve when it actually did not: A.R.
Pratkanis, J. Eskenazie, and A.G. Greenwald, “What you expect is what you
believe (but not necessarily what you get): A test of the effectiveness of
subliminal self-help audiotapes,” Basic and Applied Social Psychology 15
(2010):251–76.
Recent research into the usefulness of positive affirmations: J.V. Wood,
W.Q.E. Perunovie, and J.W. Lee, “Positive self-statements: Power for some,
peril for others,” Psychological Science 20 (2009):860–66.
One study found that poorly performing college students: D.R. Forsyth,
N.K. Lawrence, J.L. Burnette, and R.F. Baumeister, “Attempting to improve
academic performance of struggling college students by bolstering their selfesteem: The intervention that backfired,” Journal of Social and Clinical
Psychology 26 (2007):447–59.
Another found that when college students with low self-esteem had
roommates: W.B. Swann and B.W. Pelham, “Who wants out when the going
gets good?” Journal of Self and Identity 1 (2002):219–33.
praising people with low self-esteem for being considerate boyfriends or
girlfriends: S.L. Murray, J.G. Holmes, G. MacDonald, and P.C. Ellsworth,
“Through the looking glass darkly? When self-doubts turn into relationship
insecurities,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 75 (1998):1459–
80.
people with low self-esteem tend to speak up less: R.F. Baumeister, J.D.
Campbell, J.I. Krueger, and K.D. Vohs, “Does high self-esteem cause better
performance, interpersonal success, happiness, or healthier lifestyles?”
Psychological Science in the Public Interest 4 (2003):1–44.
self-compassion was found to buffer incoming college students: M.L.
Terry, M.R. Leary, and S. Mehta, “Self-compassion as a buffer against
homesickness, depression, and dissatisfaction in the transition to college,”
Self and Identity, in press (2012).
quicker emotional recoveries from separation and divorce: D.A. Sbarra,
H.L. Smith, and M.R. Mehl, “When leaving your ex, love yourself:
Observational ratings of self-compassion predict the course of emotional

recovery following marital separation,” Psychological Sciences 23
(2012):261–69.
recovered more quickly from failure and rejection experiences: K.D. Neff,
“Self-compassion, self-esteem, and well-being,” Social and Personality
Psychology Compass 5 (2011):1–12.
Reminding ourselves that we have significant worth: C.R. Critcher, D.
Dunning, and D.A. Armor, “When self-affirmations reduce defensiveness:
Timing is key,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 36 (2010):947–
59.
we can bolster our “relationship self-esteem”: D.A. Stinson, C. Logel, S.
Shepherd, and M.P. Zanna, “Rewriting the self-fulfilling prophecy of social
rejection: Self-affirmation improves relational security and social behavior
up to 2 months later,” Psychological Science 22 (2011):1145–49.
feelings of personal empowerment must be supported by evidence: L.B.
Cattanco and A.R. Chapman, “The process of empowerment: A model for use
in research and practice,” American Psychologist 65 (2010):646–59.
self-control actually functions more like a muscle: R.F. Baumeister, K.D.
Vohs, and D.M. Tice, “The strength model of self-control,” Current
Directions in Psychological Science 16 (2007):351–55.
Scientists have investigated several such “willpower workouts”: M.
Muraven, “Building self-control strength: Practicing self-control leads to
improved self-control performance,” Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 46 (2010):465–68.
Half of them received lemonade sweetened with sugar: M.T. Gailliot, R.F.
Baumeister, C.N. DeWall, J.K. Maner, E.A. Plant, D.M. Tice, L.E. Brewer,
and B.J. Schmeichel, “Self-control relies on glucose as a limited energy
source: Willpower is more than a metaphor,” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 92 (2007):325–36.
Sleep and rest also have a big impact on our willpower’s ability to
function: R.F. Baumeister, “Ego-depletion and self-control failure: An energy
model of the self’s executive function,” Self and Identity 1 (2002):129–36.
The average person spends three to four hours a day exerting some form of
willpower: W. Hofmann, R.F. Baumeister, G. Förster, and K.D. Vohs,
“Everyday temptations: An experience sampling study on desire, conflict,
and self-control,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 102

(2012):1318–35.
The best way to manage temptations is not to overestimate our ability to
manage them: G. Lowenstein, “Out of control: Visceral influences on
behavior,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 65
(1996):272–92; L.F. Nordgren, F. van Harreveld, and J. van der Pligt, “The
restraint bias: How the illusion of self-restraint promotes impulsive
behavior,” Psychological Science 20 (2009):1523–28.
researchers in one study gave moviegoers stale popcorn: D.T. Neal, W.
Wood, M. Wu, and D. Kurlander, “The pull of the past: When do habits
persist despite conflict with motives?” Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin 37 (2011):1428–37.

ALSO BY EXISLE PUBLISHING...

The Reality Slap
How to find fulfilment when life hurts
DR RUSS HARRIS
Based on the scientifically proven mindfulness-based approach called
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT), this book will teach you how
to cope effectively when life hurts, and not just survive but thrive. You will
discover how to:
find peace in the midst of pain
find calm in the midst of chaos
anchor yourself in the midst of emotional storms
increase your sense of compassion with yourself and others
use your painful emotions to cultivate wisdom and compassion
find fulfilment even when you don’t get what you want
heal your wounds and come through stronger than before.

www.exislepublishing.com

Mindfulness for Life
DR STEPHEN MCKENZIE AND DR CRAIG HASSED
Written by two experts with many years of personal and clinical experience,
this is the complete guide to living a more mindful life. Mindfulness is
simply the art of directing your attention to what is rather than what isn’t.
With a little practice, anyone can do it, and the benefits are profound. So
whether you want to:
reduce stress and anxiety
reduce your risk of disease
improve the quality of your sleep
overcome addiction
unhook yourself from depression
achieve an increased clarity of mind
manage your weight
perform better at work
be a better parent, or simply
enjoy an increased sense of happiness and wellbeing...
this is the book for you! In only a few minutes a day you can start to change
your life.

www.exislepublishing.com

The Happiness Trap Pocketbook
An illustrated guide on how to stop struggling and start living
DR RUSS HARRIS AND BEV AISBETT
A unique collaboration between cartoonist/author Bev Aisbett and Dr Russ
Harris, this is an illustrated, simplified pocketbook version of Russ’s
original, international bestseller The Happiness Trap. It’s an easy-to-read
introduction to all those powerful life-changing ideas or a great refresher
course for those already familiar with the approach.
Commonplace ideas about happiness are often misleading, inaccurate and
likely to make you miserable in the long term. For example, positive thinking
often does not work—and research shows it actually makes some people feel
worse! So open The Happiness Trap Pocketbook and learn how a new
scientifically proven, mindfulness-based approach called Acceptance and
Commitment Therapy (better known as ACT) can help you find genuine
wellbeing and fulfilment.
Whether you’re lacking confidence, facing illness, stressed at work,
struggling with low self-esteem, trying to lose weight or quit smoking, or
just wanting to be happier, healthier, and more fulfilled—in this book you
will learn effective techniques to:

reduce stress and worry
rise above fear, doubt and insecurity
handle painful thoughts and feelings more effectively
break self-defeating habits
develop self-acceptance and self-compassion
let go of inaccurate and misleading (but very popular) ideas about
happiness, and
create a rich, full and meaningful life.

www.exislepublishing.com

BACK COVER MATERIAL
First aid for failure.
Although we have bandages for cuts, chicken soup for colds, and ice packs
for bruises, most of us have no idea how to treat day-to-day emotional
injuries such as failure, rejection, guilt and loss. But, as Guy Winch, PhD,
points out, these kinds of emotional injuries often get worse when left
untreated and can significantly impact our quality of life. In this fascinating
and highly practical book he provides the emotional first aid treatments we
have been lacking.
Explaining the long-term fallout that can result from seemingly minor
emotional and psychological injuries, Dr Winch offers concrete, easy-to-use
exercises backed up by hard cutting-edge science to aid in recovery. He uses
relatable anecdotes about real patients he has treated over the years and often
gives us a much-needed dose of humour as well.
Prescriptive, programmatic, and unique, this first-aid kit for battered
emotions will appeal to readers of Unstuck by James S. Gordon and SelfCompassion by Kristin Neff.
DR GUY WINCH is a licensed psychologist and author. He received a
PhD in Clinical Psychology from New York University in 1991 and
completed a postdoctoral fellowship in family and couples therapy at NYU
Medical Center. His first book, The Squeaky Wheel, has been translated into
six languages. In between, he built a private practice in New York City,
started The Squeaky Wheel Blog on PsychologyToday.com and even dabbled
in stand-up comedy.

Index
A
accountability, 1, 2, 3
acetaminophen (Tylenol), 1
adolescents, 1
affirmations, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
aggression, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
alcohol abuse, 1, 2
Analyze This (1999), 1
anger
catharsis model (venting anger), 1, 2
professional help for, 1
reframing, 1, 2, 3, 4

in response to rejection, 1, 2, 3
and ruminations, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
anxiety and stress
and failure, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
and mindfulness practices, 1, 2
and ruminations, 1
and self-control, 1, 2
and self-esteem issues, 1, 2, 3
test anxiety, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
apologies, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
essential components of, 1, 2, 3, 4
execution of, 1, 2, 3
and unresolved guilt, 1
assertiveness, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11

atonement for transgressions, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
attractiveness, 1, 2, 3
‘average’ negative connotations of, 1, 2
avoidance, 1, 2, 3, 4

B
ball-tossing rejection experiment, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
beliefs, impact of loss and trauma on, 1, 2
benefit-finding after loss, 1, 2, 3, 4
benefit of the doubt, extending, 1, 2
betrayal and guilt, 1, 2, 3, 4
big-picture responses to tragedies, 1, 2
breathing and anxiety, 1, 2
Buckner, Bill, 1, 2, 3
bullying, 1, 2

C
Cast Away (2000), 1
cats, 1
Census, U.S., 1
change, adjusting to, 1, 2
children and fear of failure, 1
choking under pressure, 1, 2, 3, 4
cigarette smoking, 1
cognitive therapy, 1
Columbine school shootings (1999), 1
common sense, effect of rejection on, 1, 2
communication
effect of guilt on, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
in electronic mediums, 1

compassion for self, 1, 2, 3, 4
compensation for transgressions, 1, 2
compliments
See feedback
confidence
and failure, 1, 2, 3
and self-esteem, 1
cortisol, 1
counseling and ruminations, 1
counterfactual thoughts, 1, 2
couples
infidelity in, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
perspective-taking errors in, 1, 2, 3
resistance to compliments in, 1

and unresolved guilt, 1, 2
crises of faith, 1, 2
critical incident stress debriefing (CISD), 1

D
decision making, 1, 2, 3
defensiveness, 1, 2
depression
and excessive guilt, 1
and failure, 1
and negativity, 1
and ruminations, 1, 2
and self-esteem issues, 1
desensitization, 1, 2, 3
discrimination, 1

disloyalty guilt, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
distractions from ruminations, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Dobby effect, 1
dogs, 1, 2
doubts, 1, 2

E
eating disorders, 1, 2, 3
Edison, Thomas, 1, 2
e-mails, 1
emotions
emotional validation, 1, 2, 3, 4
expressing, 1, 2, 3
and memory formation, 1
and prayer, 1

and rejection, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
and ruminations, 1, 2
See also anger; empathy
empathy
accessing, 1, 2, 3, 4
and apologies, 1
atrophied empathetic skills, 1, 2, 3, 4
definition of, 1
and emotional validation, 1
and failure, 1
and perspective taking, 1
societal trends in, 1
empowerment and disempowerment, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14

F

failure, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38,
39, 40, 41, 42
and choking under pressure, 1, 2, 3, 4
common responses to, 1, 2, 3
and execution of task, 1, 2
in families, 1
fear of, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
generalizations about, 1
general treatment guidelines for, 1
and getting support, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
lessons from, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
and passivity and helplessness, 1, 2, 3, 4
and performance pressure, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
professional help for, 1

psychological wounds inflicted by, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17
and regaining control, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
and self-esteem, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
and self-sabotage, 1, 2, 3, 4
taking responsibility for, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
families
fear of failure in, 1
and guilt, 1, 2, 3, 4
See also couples
fate, 1, 2
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), 1
feedback
and growth opportunities, 1
negative feedback, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5

positive feedback, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13
‘firsts’ following losses, 1
food disorders, 1, 2
Ford, Henry, 1
forgiveness
asking for, 1, 2, 3, 4
barriers to, 1, 2, 3
and guilt, 1
self-forgiveness, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
See also apologies
Frankl, Viktor, 1
friendships and rejection, 1, 2

G
gender differences in communication, 1

gift giving, 1
glucose, 1
goals
and failure, 1, 2, 3, 4
gaining control over, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
and New Year resolutions, 1, 2
grieving
five-stages theory, 1
and relationships, 1, 2, 3
rituals around, 1
role of time in, 1
See also loss and trauma
guilt, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38
and apologies, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10

and communication, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
disloyalty guilt, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
duration of, 1
function of, 1, 2, 3
general treatment guidelines for, 1
guilt trips, 1, 2
and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 1
professional help for, 1, 2
psychological wounds inflicted by, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12
and reengagement in life, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
and relationships, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
and reparations, 1, 2, 3, 4
and self-condemnation, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
and self-forgiveness, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12

separation guilt, 1, 2, 3, 4
survivor guilt, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
unresolved guilt, 1, 2

H
helping others
and loneliness, 1
and ruminations, 1, 2
helplessness, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Holly, Buddy, 1
homosexuality, 1, 2, 3
how questions in response to tragedies, 1, 2
humor, 1, 2

I
identity

impact of loss and trauma on, 1, 2
and low self-esteem, 1
recovering aspects of your ‘self’, 1, 2, 3, 4
infidelity, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
information assessment, 1
insecurity, 1, 2, 3
intellectual performance, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Internet, 1, 2
intrusive thoughts, 1
See also ruminations
Irish wakes, 1

J
Jennings, Waylon, 1
Jewish shivahs, 1

L
learning from failure, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
letters and e-mails, 1
logic, effect of rejection on, 1, 2
loneliness, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37,
38
and atrophied relationship muscles, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
contagiousness of, 1, 2
and emotional bonds, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
and extending the benefit of the doubt, 1, 2
general treatment guidelines for, 1, 2
negativity associated with, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
perceptions surrounding, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
and perspective taking, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5

and pets, 1, 2
physical and cognitive effects of, 1, 2
prevalence of, 1
professional help for, 1
psychological wounds inflicted by, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12
and rejection, 1, 2
and self-defeating behaviors, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
and self-esteem, 1
and social-connection opportunities, 1, 2, 3, 4
loss and trauma, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28
communicating with friends and family after, 1, 2
finding meaning in tragedy, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
general treatment guidelines for, 1, 2

impact on beliefs, 1, 2
impact on identity, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
impact on life, 1, 2, 3
impact on relationships, 1, 2, 3
and individual nature of coping, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
and post-traumatic growth, 1
professional help for, 1, 2
psychological wounds inflicted by, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
recovering aspects of your ‘self’, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
talking about, 1, 2, 3
loyalties, 1, 2, 3, 4

M
Man’s Search for Meaning (Frankl), 1
marriages

See couples
math, girls’ performance in, 1
meaning in loss and trauma, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
in benefit-finding, 1, 2, 3, 4
in sense-making, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
in taking action, 1, 2
meetup.com, 1
mementos, 1
memories, 1, 2
men, communication skills of, 1
mental energy, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
mindfulness practices, 1, 2
motivation, 1

N

narcissism, 1
negativity
and depression, 1
and failure, 1, 2, 3, 4
and loneliness, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
and rumination, 1, 2
and self-esteem, 1
New Year resolutions, 1, 2
nondominant hand exercises, 1
Nyad, Diana, 1

O
online relationships, 1, 2
opportunities for improvement, 1, 2
optimism, 1

ostracism, 1, 2
See also rejection

P
pain, physical, 1
passivity, 1, 2, 3, 4
performance pressure, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
perspective
errors in, 1, 2, 3
and ruminations, 1, 2, 3, 4
persuasion, power of, 1, 2
pessimism, 1, 2, 3, 4
Phelps, Michael, 1
photographs of loved ones, 1, 2
physical effects of loneliness, 1, 2

physical trauma, 1, 2
Pistorius, Oscar, 1, 2
point of view, 1
post-traumatic growth, 1
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 1, 2, 3
prayer, 1
predestination, 1, 2
problem solving skills, 1, 2, 3

R
reason and rejection, 1, 2
reengagement in life, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
rejection, 1
chronic rejection, effects of, 1, 2, 3, 4
complications from, 1

and desensitization, 1, 2, 3
emotional pain resulting from, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
generalizing, 1
and need to belong, 1, 2, 3, 4
personalizing, 1, 2
professional help for, 1
and reason, 1, 2
romantic rejections, 1, 2, 3, 4
self-criticism, management of, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
and self-esteem, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
and social-connection management, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
social rejections, 1, 2
workplace rejections, 1, 2, 3
relationships

effect of loneliness on, 1
extending the benefit of the doubt in, 1, 2
and guilt, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
impact of loss and trauma on, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
online relationships, 1, 2
perceptions of, 1
perspective-taking errors in, 1, 2, 3
romantic rejections, 1, 2, 3, 4
and ruminations, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
and self-esteem issues, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
See also couples
religion
and disloyalty guilt, 1
and reframing anger, 1

religious rituals, 1
remorse, 1, 2
reparations, 1, 2, 3, 4
resentment, 1, 2, 3
responsibility for transgressions, 1, 2
Richardson, J.P. ‘the Big Bopper’, 1
romantic rejections, 1, 2, 3, 4
ruminations, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29
and anger, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
consequences of, 1
and distractions, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
following loss and trauma, 1, 2, 3
general treatment guidelines for, 1
and mental resources, 1, 2, 3

perspective management for, 1, 2, 3, 4
professional help for, 1
psychological wounds inflicted by, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
and relationships, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
and sadness, 1, 2, 3, 4
self-reflection versus, 1, 2
suppression of, 1
time frames on, 1, 2, 3

S
sadness, 1, 2, 3, 4
sarcasm, 1
Second Life, 1, 2
self-compassion, 1, 2, 3, 4
self-condemnation, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5

self-consciousness, 1, 2
self-control effect of stress on, 1, 2, 3
strategies for improving, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
self-criticism, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18
self-defeating prophecies and behaviors
and failure, 1
identifying and correcting, 1, 2, 3, 4
and loneliness, 1, 2, 3, 4
self-esteem, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37,
38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44
and accuracy of self-assessments, 1, 2
and affirmations, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
and anxiety, 1, 2, 3, 4
‘average’ levels of, 1, 2

consequences of low self-esteem, 1
and depression, 1
and excessive guilt, 1
and failure, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
general treatment guidelines for, 1, 2
high self-esteem, pitfalls of, 1
and loneliness, 1
and negativity, 1, 2, 3
and New Year resolutions, 1, 2
and positive feedback, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13
professional help for, 1, 2
psychological wounds inflicted by, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15
and rejection, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
and relationships, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5

and self-compassion, 1, 2, 3, 4
and self-control, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
and self-help programs, 1, 2, 3, 4
and vulnerability to emotional injuries, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
self-forgiveness
and accountability, 1, 2, 3
and atonement, 1, 2, 3
steps for attaining, 1
and unresolved guilt, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
self-punishment, 1, 2, 3
self-sabotage, 1, 2, 3, 4
self-worth, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
See also self-esteem
sense-making after loss, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6

separation guilt, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
sexual orientation, 1, 2, 3
shame
and failure, 1, 2, 3, 4
and unresolved guilt, 1
shivahs, 1
Short, Jim, 1
shunning, 1
See also rejection
single-person households, 1
sleep, 1
smoking, 1
social events, 1, 2

social norms, violations of, 1, 2, 3
social skills, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
speaking to quell anxiety, 1
stereotypes
and performance pressure, 1
and preferences of others, 1
stereotype threat, 1, 2, 3
strengths
failure’s role in, 1
identification and affirmation of, 1, 2, 3, 4
stress and anxiety
and failure, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
and mindfulness practices, 1, 2
and ruminations, 1

and self-control, 1, 2
and self-esteem issues, 1, 2, 3
test anxiety, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
substance abuse, 1, 2
substitutability, 1
support, eliciting, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
survivor guilt, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8

T
test anxiety, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
therapies, traditional, 1
tragedies, finding meaning in, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
transitional periods of life, 1, 2
trauma
See loss and trauma

triggers, behavioral, 1
trust, 1, 2
Tylenol (acetaminophen), 1

U
unresolved guilt, 1, 2
U.S. Census, 1

V
values, 1, 2
violence, 1, 2, 3
vocalizing to quell anxiety, 1
volunteering, 1

W
wakes, 1
what might have been questions in response to tragedies, 1, 2

whistle-blowers, 1
whistling, 1
why questions in response to tragedies, 1, 2
willpower
effect of stress on, 1, 2, 3
strategies for improving, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
withdrawal following loss and trauma, 1, 2
women, communication skills of, 1
workplace rejections, 1, 2, 3
writing as response to loss and trauma, 1

