“An insightful and important book.”—Andrew Solomon
National Book Award–winning author of The Noonday Demon

$16.95 US

Award-winning journalist Anna Mehler Paperny’s
stunning memoir chronicles with courageous
honesty and uncommon eloquence her experience of depression and her quest to explore what
we know and don’t know about this disease that
affects approximately seventeen million adults in
the US in any given year—providing an invaluable
guide to a system struggling to find solutions. As
fascinating as it is heartrending, as outrageously
funny as it is serious, it is a must-read for anyone impacted by depression—and that’s pretty
much everybody.

Depression is a havoc-wreaking illness that masquerades as personal failing and hijacks your life.
After a major suicide attempt in her early twenties,
Anna Mehler Paperny resolved to put her reporter’s skills to use to get to know her enemy, setting
off on a journey to understand her condition, the
dizzying array of medical treatments on offer, and a
medical profession in search of answers. Charting
the way depression wrecks so many lives, she
maps competing schools of therapy, pharmacology,
cutting-edge medicine, the pill-popping pitfalls of
long-term treatment, the glaring unknowns and the
institutional shortcomings that both patients and
practitioners are up against. She interviews leading
medical experts across the US and Canada, from
psychiatrists to neurologists, brain-mapping pioneers to family practitioners, and others dabbling
in strange hypotheses—and shares compassionate
conversations with fellow sufferers.
Hello I Want to Die Please Fix Me tracks Anna’s
quest for knowledge and her desire to get well. Impeccably reported, it is a profoundly compelling
story about the human spirit and the myriad ways
we treat (and fail to treat) the disease that accounts
for more years swallowed up by disability than any
other in the world.

Acclaim for

Finalist for the

2019 Hilary Weston Writers’ Trust Prize For Nonfiction
“A must-read for those who want to understand what goes on in the
heads of those who take their own lives each year (800,000 annually
worldwide), and the multiples more who, like the author, come
perilously close. Ms. Mehler Paperny does a masterful job of delving
into the complexities of living with depression.”
—André Picard, The Globe and Mail
“In this courageous and honest book, Anna Mehler Paperny plumbs
the depths of her own acute depression, and also investigates the
cultural, social, and historical discourse around despair. She writes
with a stunning fluency that belies the narrative’s underlying pain.
This is an insightful and important book.”
—Andrew Solomon, author of National Book Award–winning
The Noonday Demon
“This is such an important book. . . . Paperny writes with urgency and
intensity because she’s tapping into an essential truth: everyone
deserves dignified mental healthcare, but systemic injustices create
huge discrepancies in how people are treated. I learned so much from
this engaging, well-researched, courageous book. It belongs in the
canon of ‘must-reads’ to understand mental health treatment today.”
—Mark Lukach, author of My Lovely Wife in the Psych Ward
“Journalist Mehler Paperny offers a startling and intimate portrait of her
multiple attempts at suicide and digs into the disturbingly inadequate
‘toolbox’ available to individuals suffering from acute depression. . . .
This earnest and informative volume serves as a frank guide for those
dealing with depression.”—Publishers Weekly, starred review
“Well-researched, engaging, and highly readable. . . . An eye-opening
and humane book treatment of a difficult subject.”—Kirkus Reviews
“It’s hard to imagine any group of people who wouldn’t benefit in some
way from reading this book. Those who have been through the system
will have a chance to feel less alone in their experiences, and those who
haven’t will gain necessary insight into what it’s like.”—Quill & Quire

“The world needs more Anna Mehler Papernys, not fewer. Brave,
compassionate, insightful, and wincingly self-aware. Ready to challenge
convention, hold feet to the fire, to ‘punch in the face with words,’ as she
puts it in her book. . . . Anna has announced herself as one of the most
tenaciously curious working journalists, working minds, that we have.”
—Ian Gill, The Tyee
“Anna Mehler Paperny illuminates the dark corners of suicide and
depression with wit and tenacity. Both an extraordinary work of
journalism and a poignant, harrowing (and occasionally funny)
memoir. Hello I Want to Die Please Fix Me is fearless and necessary.”
—Don Gillmor, author of To the River: Losing My Brother
“Compelling. . . . This is a very good book. People coping with
depression will find it supportive as well as entertaining (Anna has a
great sense of humor). I also think it will help educate the public.”
—Dr. Marcia Valenstein, MD, MSc, psychiatrist, University of
Michigan Hospitals, and Veterans Affairs Ann Arbor
Healthcare System
“A remarkable book . . . I am just so impressed by Anna’s honesty and
rigor, her courage, her thorough research, her insight, her wisdom and
her sense of humor. I hugely admire what she has achieved. I am sure it
will be a great help to many people, and I have come away with new
understanding after reading her book.”
—Dr. Irfan Dhalla, MD, MSc, vice president, Health Quality
Ontario, St. Michael’s Hospital
“Anna’s the best journalist I know. Her story about the mental
health care system as seen through her own experiences is an act of
monumental bravery. This is a book that will save lives.”
—Omar El Akkad, author of American War, on Twitter
“Clear-eyed without being dispassionate, this book has so much to
offer even the most well-versed in mental health issues. Anna Mehler
Paperny goes far deeper than the surface conversations we usually
have about depression, giving us the unvarnished reality of what it
means to live with the feeling you want to die. Brave and brilliantly
researched, this powerful book is poised to create real change, and is
an absolute must-read for those who have had their lives touched by
depression—which is everyone.”
—Stacey May Fowles, author of Be Good and Baseball Life Advice

NEW YORK

Hello I Want to Die Please Fix Me: Depression in the First Person
Copyright © 2019, 2020 by Anna Mehler Paperny
Originally published in Canada by Random House Canada, an imprint of Penguin
Random House, in 2019. First published in the United States in revised form by The
Experiment, LLC, in 2020. Published by arrangement with Random House Canada,
a division of Penguin Random House Canada Limited.
All rights reserved. Except for brief passages quoted in newspaper, magazine, radio,
television, or online reviews, no portion of this book may be reproduced, distributed,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or information storage or retrieval system, without the
prior written permission of the publisher.
The Experiment, LLC
220 East 23rd Street, Suite 600
New York, NY 10010-4658
theexperimentpublishing.com
This book contains the opinions and ideas of its author. It is intended to provide
helpful and informative material on the subjects addressed in the book. It is sold with
the understanding that the author and publisher are not engaged in rendering
medical, health, or any other kind of personal professional services in the book. The
author and publisher specifically disclaim all responsibility for any liability, loss, or
risk—personal or otherwise—that is incurred as a consequence, directly or
indirectly, of the use and application of any of the contents of this book.
THE EXPERIMENT and its colophon are registered trademarks of The Experiment,
LLC. Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their
products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book
and The Experiment was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been
capitalized.
The Experiment’s books are available at special discounts when purchased in bulk for
premiums and sales promotions as well as for fund-raising or educational use. For
details, contact us at info@theexperimentpublishing.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available upon request
ISBN 978-1-61519-492-6
Ebook ISBN 978-1-61519-673-9
Cover design and hand lettering by Jennifer Griffiths
Text design by Jennifer Griffiths
Author photograph by Derek O’Donnell
Manufactured in the United States of America
First printing March 2020
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

for Dr. Silveira

I myself am hell;
nobody’s here—
—Robert Lowell

Contents
Preface xiii

PART I: IN THE FIRST PERSON

1 Cataclysm 3
2 When You Try to Die and Don’t
3 Psych-Ward Sojourn

10

23

4 What, Me Depressed?

37

5 When Diagnosis Makes You Crazy

40

6 Killing Yourself Is Tougher Than You’d Think
7 Know Thine Enemy
8 Checking Boxes
9 Suicide Blues

50

57

64

10 Getting in Trouble

79

PART II: TREATMENT ATTEMPTS

11 A Pill-Popping Parade
12 Good Noticing!

91

106

13 Zapping, Shocking, and Burning Your
Brain into Submission 110
14 Brainiacs

121

15 A Dry Pharma Pipeline

132

16 Old Illness, New Tricks: The Electrode
in Your Brain 140
17 Old Illness, New Tricks: From Psychedelics
to Smartphones 149

43

PART III: A KICK IN THE TEETH

18 Stigma and Related Bullshit
19 Through the Cracks

167

184

20 Mental Health Is for Rich People

192

21 Trying to Heal the Littlest Minds

199

22 “More Children Do Not Have to Die”
23 Race as Barrier

212

227

PART IV: IN THE MAZE

24 Who You Gonna Call?

243

25 How to Talk about What We Talk about When We Talk
about Wanting to Die 251
26 Certifiable

263

27 Trust Issues

284

PART V: A DENOUEMENT OF SORTS

28 First Person Afterword

301

Resources and Further Reading
Acknowledgments
Notes

312

Index

330

About the Author

310

338

308

Preface
How do you talk about trying to die? Haltingly, urgently: in messages and calls to friends. Abashedly: You stand in the middle of a
hospital hallway on a parent’s cell phone as your grandfather bellows, “No more stupid tricks!” Gingerly: You stand in your psych
ward at the patients’ landline, conscious of fellow patients watching TV just behind you, white corkscrew cord curled around your
finger as you murmur to your grandmother who understands better
than she should. Who is the first to tell you, as you lean against the
orange-tinted counter with its row of cupboards for confiscated
belongings below the sink, that you have to write all this down.
And even though you put it off for months, agonize for years, you
know she’s right.
Quietly, desperately: in one medical appointment after another.
Trepidatiously: to colleagues. Searchingly: in interviews. Increasingly
loudly. In a book? With the world?
A disorder hijacks your life and becomes an obsession. Know
thine enemy. Chart in minute detail the way it wrecks you and seek
out every aliquot of information out there. Butt up against the constricting limits of human understanding, smash yourself against that
wall and seek instead to map the contours of collective ignorance.
Know the unknowns of thine enemy, learn them by heart. Because
even if you never best it, never loosen its grip on your existence, at

xiv

Anna Mehler Paperny

least your best attempt at understanding will give you some semblance of agency.
No one wants this crap illness that masquerades as personal
failing. I had no desire to plumb its depths. The struggle to function leaves me little capacity to do so. But in the end I had no choice.
I approached this enemy I barely believed in the only way I knew
how: as a reporter. I took a topic about which I knew nothing and
sought somehow to know everything. I talked to people in search
of answers and mostly found more questions.
Personal experience has made me more invested in addressing
the gross inequities depression exacerbates, in hammering home the
human, societal, economic costs. The depth of depression’s debilitation and our reprehensible failure to address it consume me because
I’m there, spending days paralyzed and nights wracked because my
meds aren’t good enough. But this isn’t some quixotic personal project that pertains to me and no one else. Depression affects everyone
on the planet, directly or indirectly, in every possible sphere. Its very
ubiquity robs it of sexiness but not urgency. I found this in every
interview I did, in every article I read, in every attempt I made to
sort out how the fuck this can be so bad and so badly unaddressed.
This book is also my way of exorcising endless guilt at having
been so lucky—to have benefited from publicly funded inpatient and
outpatient mental health care; to have maintained, for the most part,
employment; to have had patches of insurance lighten the burden of
paying for years of drugs. This shouldn’t be the purview of the privileged but it is. We fail the most marginalized at every level, then
wonder why they worsen.
I don’t want to be the person writing this book. Don’t want to be
chewed up by despair so unremitting the only conceivable response
is to write it. But I am. I write this because I need both life vest and
anchor, because I need both to scream and to arm myself in the dark.
Maybe you need to scream, to arm yourself, too.

1
Cataclysm
What scares me most is what I don’t remember.
And that’s everything between scarfing sleeping pills on a Sunday
night to waking fuzzily in the ICU days later, Velcro ties strapping
my wrists and forearms to cold metal railings ringing the bed, keeping my erratic sedated writhing from disconnecting a maze of IVs
plugged into my arteries. I discovered I was wearing a hospital gown
and attached to a catheter (the latter, especially, not something you
want to take you by surprise).
I was shocked when I surfaced at how much time had passed.
I’ve no recollection of the hours on dialysis. Just the lasting image
of a churning strawberry-red slushee machine, which is how my dad
described the lifesaving contraption days later.
I don’t remember drinking antifreeze. Don’t recall if it tasted
acrid or cloying, its texture watery or viscous. The arresting electric
blue I do recall vividly from staring at the family-size jug sitting under
the sink every time I used the bathroom in the months after I bought
it. (I’ve never owned a car.)
I can’t remember conversations I had in the twelve-odd hours
between the handful of zopiclone and the liter of antifreeze. But
my text messages and call history betray me: I’d offered, in a near-­
blackout state, to rush out and cover a story that mercifully was taken

4

Anna Mehler Paperny

on by someone else. When I asked about this later, the coworker who
called said I just sounded groggy. No kidding.
I can’t remember being found in my apartment, overdosed on
antifreeze, by two senior editors at The Globe and Mail, the newspaper where I worked at the time. Mortification overwhelms me each
time I imagine the scene and I still wish I’d died rather than be found
that way.

That, in September 2011, was my first suicide attempt, my first
post-attempt hospitalization and my entry point into a labyrinthine
psychiatric care system via the trapdoor of botched self-obliteration.
For me it was an inexorable resolution—the only possible culmination of a conviction I’d had for months but kept putting off.
I was twenty-four and I’d just come off a pair of great assignments
working as a staff reporter at my dream newspaper. But the preceding eighteen-odd months had been characterized by worsening,
lengthening episodes of despair during which all I wanted was to
die. For a while I could still immerse myself in my work, could still
get that reporter’s high, that bright weightless bubble filling my diaphragm as I chased a story. Could still convince myself, in giddy
interludes, that my life had purpose.
But those interludes of story-chasing joy became spotty and infrequent, a radio signal subsumed by static. The bilious taste of failure
swallowed everything.

That late-September Fr iday, two days before the attempt, I
put the final edits into a political feature as sheets of rain thrummed
against the wall-wide newsroom window. The nadir that in recent
months had begun to engulf me at the end of every story’s high was,
this time, too deep to clamber out of. I felt scraped empty, nothing
left and nowhere else to go.
I met family visiting from out of town for dinner that night at a

Cataclysm

5

fancy, poorly lit restaurant where if you drink enough silky-cold gin
you don’t notice how little actual food is exquisitely plated in front
of you. I vaguely recall acting stupid-sentimental but not much else.
Stopping at the downtown Toronto office to pick up some things
on my way home, I did what later felt like the first dumb thing. An
acquaintance—someone I’d met once who had subsequently added
me on Facebook and with whom I’d exchanged muted messages
during periods of mutual insomnia—struck up the most casual of
“how you doing” online conversations. To which I responded that I
was finally going to kill myself.
Ha-ha, not funny
Not joking
Don’t kill yourself
But I want to
The exchange ended with my saying I probably wouldn’t do anything. Anyway, g’night. Talk to you later. I think this is when I deleted
my social media accounts.
I wouldn’t have said anything to Facebook Guy in the first place
were it not for the tenuousness of our acquaintance and the atonality of online conversation, which left me feeling fairly confident he
wouldn’t do anything.
Wrong. Wrong on all counts.
I didn’t kill myself that night. Didn’t even try. Crashing hard
from serial work weeks without weekends and a boozy family
dinner, I collapsed in my apartment, fell into zonked sleep fully
dressed on an unmade bed.
The second dumb thing was missing the incessant calls to my
phone, left on vibrate. This poor dude I barely knew panicked. He
contacted a mutual friend, who called me, then the police. It was
their call that I finally surfaced from slumber to register. I was just
out of it enough to see the blocked number and irrationally assume
it was the desk—my editors—calling in the middle of the night with
some urgent query or request. Workaholic reflexes overrode my
desire to be eternally alone.

6

Anna Mehler Paperny

Instead it was a police officer wanting my address and I, in sleepy
half-stupor, gave it to him. Except then, of course, they came to my
apartment.
I didn’t know how you’re supposed to respond when a pair of cops
shows up at your door at three o’clock in the morning saying they’ve
been sent because someone told them you’re trying to off yourself.
The keenest emotion I recall was embarrassment.
“The place is a mess,” I apologized.
That was an understatement. I’ve never been neat but the conditions of my ground-floor apartment in a shabbily aging building
with a mouse problem compounded by my own apathy were probably startling. In my defense, the hole in one kitchen wall leading
straight outside, the mildewed bathroom ceiling, the missing bathroom tiles where sink met floor, the warped wood floorboards that
seemed impossible to clean, were not my fault; they predated me. I
just hadn’t mustered the will to have them fixed. The overall disarray, the papers everywhere, the food wrappers and containers, the
sticky mousetraps in need of chucking, all contributing to the overall thick atmosphere of must that had crescendoed over the preceding months—that was my bad.
“It’s OK,” one officer said. “We’re used to messes.”
But there was something in this mess or in my bleary “everything’s fine” mumblings that convinced them I should not be left
alone. They didn’t cart me away or cuff me but when I asked if I could
stay home and go back to bed, the answer was firmly negative. So
I went with them, unwilling; their force implicit, not physical.
I wondered only later how that scene would have played out had
I been black and male, and what would have happened if I had simply
refused to go.
That was my first ride in the back of a cop car, a barrier between
me and the front seats. It was a short trip to the nearest hospital, where
the three of us sat in the dull beige fluorescence of the ER waiting
room and made small talk until someone arrived to usher me into
the psychiatric crisis ward at St. Joseph’s Health Centre—St. Joe’s,

Cataclysm

7

as its familiars call it. We somehow—reporter reflex—started talking about their careers. One of the officers had been a sound technician in another life and I made a mental note to pass the name of his
program to a kid I’d interviewed days earlier who wanted to study
music production after finishing high school.
They were decent guys. They must’ve been all too accustomed to
dealing with situations like mine, with people more erratic and less
cooperative than I. My situation—despondent suicidal chick in an
apartment given over to entropy—was a breeze compared to nightmare scenarios of agitated, sick, harmless people killed by police in
hospital gowns,1 on streetcars,2 in their own homes or apartment
buildings.3 These cops just talked to me until they were free to go
back to their jobs, catch some bad guys. Given that some cops spend
hours effectively babysitting someone until a hospital can deal with
them, they were no doubt relieved when I was led away into the crisis
ward and became someone else’s responsibility.
If you’re ever picked up by police and carted off to hospital in the
middle of the night, I recommend bringing a warm sweater and a
good book (cell, charger, wallet, writing implements, and health card
are also worthwhile accessories). I, shortsighted fool, was wearing
the previous day’s skirt, a T-shirt and a thin raincoat I’d grabbed
groggily on the way to the police cruiser so I’d have a pocket for my
keys, which were quickly confiscated along with my phone, pen, and
the digital recorder still in my jacket pocket from work, a day and a
lifetime earlier.
The crisis ward was dark and bare and cold and I was bored out
of my mind. Curled up shivering on a plasticky hospital chair, grimly
suicidal, I mentally cursed Facebook Dude for freaking out when
clearly—I told myself as I brooded on death—I hadn’t been serious.
Kicked myself for caving to the desire for human contact and then
not even bothering to try to follow through on my own death.
I was almost demented with fatigue. I remember someone offering me a bed, which I declined—afraid that acquiescing would mark
me a patient, someone who belonged there, no different from the

8

Anna Mehler Paperny

bedridden man quietly moaning behind me. I didn’t belong, I told
myself. I just needed to clear up this misunderstanding.
A young kid—fourteen, maybe—regained consciousness in an
adjoining room. The orderly returning his backpack had to explain
to him how he’d wound up there after police found him unconscious
and alcohol-poisoned at a friend’s house party. For the next six hours
I sat there envying his escape. The blessed orderly took pity on me
when the paper arrived; I’ve never been so glad to see the flyer-filled
Saturday Star. By the time a tired-eyed psychiatrist saw me around
nine o’clock I would have said anything to get out of there so as to
kill myself as soon as possible.
It became immediately clear she had no idea I’d been brought to
the hospital’s psychiatric crisis ward in a cop car, against my will:
When I said I didn’t want therapy, just wanted to go home (with some
pills to help me sleep, please), she gave me a withering-pitying look
as if to ask why I was wasting her time. By ten o’clock I was out in the
sharp bright morning making a beeline for a pharmacy to fill a disappointingly small prescription for the sleeping pill zopiclone. (I’ve
never needed chemical help falling asleep.)
The rest of Saturday was strange. I think I slept. I think I tried
to go for a run along the lake but couldn’t muster much energy, runwalking and petering out about half a mile from my apartment, on
a rocky outcropping on the Etobicoke side of the Humber Bridge.
Pacing the rocks, I exchanged a surreal series of short emails with
a colleague who’d heard about my night in the crisis ward and was
tentatively trying, it seemed, to make sure I was OK without becoming embroiled in whatever weird life drama I had going on.
Accustomed as we’ve become to communicating textually, I can
tell you there are times when hearing someone’s voice—as anxietyinducing and time-consuming as that can be for the caller—would
make a big difference.
I knew better now than to say how I felt. “I’m fine. Really. Don’t
worry.”
I think I would have tried to kill myself that night were it not for

Cataclysm

9

an unexpected Sunday assignment, a campaign budget announcement for which I felt obliged to stay alive. I remember astonishing
watery sunlight and cold wind whipping wet hair against my face
as I biked downtown Sunday morning. I negotiated the incongruous banality of a technical briefing in a windowless hotel conference
room. I remember joking with a fellow journo about our lack of
math skills. There was a scrum: Something about provincial debt,
something about early voting; a web file that needed updating and
contextualizing; counterclaims from opposing parties to parse and
write up.4 Then I was free.
I think I bought groceries and the Sunday New York Times. I think
I loitered over tea and Wi-Fi in a Queen Street café-bar. Eventually
I made my way home. It was past midnight by the time I grabbed
the plastic jug of bright blue antifreeze from its spot in the bathroom, poured it into a pair of oversized pottery mugs. (Suicidality
notwithstanding, I wasn’t about to chug antifreeze from the jug: I
had standards.) I placed the mugs of poison on the floor beside my
burgundy futon couch. I recall keeping the newspaper fanned out
in sections beside me. Why? As a prop? Did suicide seem less
pathetic if I just pretended I was catching up on world news?
I swallowed the fistful of pills first, waited expectantly. I remember
registering disappointment in their inefficacy before consciousness
and memory dropped off a cliff.

2
When You Try to Die and Don’t
Monday would have been when those unnerving ghost exchanges
took place, when I spoke with a colleague about who would cover an
electoral spat over canceled gas plants. So it must have been shortly
afterward that I swallowed the antifreeze. I think. I don’t know. So
terrifyingly blank is that space in my memory that anything could
have happened to fill it. I only insert the most likely chain of events in
the hope that if I repeat it enough the repetition will confer an internal sheen of truth.
I do know it wasn’t until Tuesday that my unresponsiveness
began to worry people. Following a series of phone calls and emails
between coworkers and friends wondering where I was, a pair of
senior editors from work arrived at my building just as, separately,
my friend Wesley did. Wesley knew me. He’d seen me at my lessthan-best. But the editors? Intimidatingly smart and really not the
kind of people you’d expect at someone’s sickbed, these two managers held my career in their hands. I wouldn’t want them to see
me fumbling through a fruitless phone interview, let alone midmethanol overdose.
Truth is, they saved my life. But the shame and self-revulsion I
feel at the thought of being found there by them hasn’t gone away.
They got into my apartment (had I left the door open? why?) and
found a mess.

When You Try to Die and Don’t

11

The place was a mess. I was a mess, covered in my own puke. It
pained me to be told, months later, that I wasn’t totally unconscious—
just not terribly responsive or remotely cogent. They called the police
and tried to figure out what I’d taken. They failed: It wasn’t until my
cousin and dad were dispatched later that week to brave the premises
that they found the open antifreeze container, about a quarter of the
four-liter vessel gone.
Police arrived first, then an ambulance. I’m told I joked with paramedics while being wheeled out on a stretcher. What stands out for my
friend Wesley, poor bastard, is how filthy my kitchen sink was. He and
one of the editors followed the ambulance to St. Joe’s feeling there was
little they could do right then apart from figure out who needed to know
what. He and a group of five close friends—the people who became my
rocks in the weeks and years following—then huddled to discuss what
to do. Among other things they asked each other how emotionally
invested they were each prepared to become in this. Surely most people
in their right minds would go running in the opposite direction. I don’t
know why these people didn’t disappear. (Other friends and colleagues
did. I don’t blame them.) I don’t know why they decided to subject
themselves and their own challenging lives to my prickly, unwelcoming, messy state of affairs. I don’t know whether they’ve regretted it.
I’ve lacked the guts to ask. But my god, I’m glad they did.

When I sur faced my parents were there. My poor parents, who
had flown in from Vancouver, who had by then had about thirty-six
hours to acclimatize to the idea—and the sight—of their daughter
hospitalized after a botched suicide.
Years later my mom recalls being regarded by the kidney specialist who had come to oversee my treatment. “She said, ‘You’re so calm.’
And I realized I just had kind of been so focused on fixing it. Get
here, fix it. I couldn’t really entertain the alternative.”
One of the first things mental health practitioners tell you after
you try to die is that your recent attempt is not selfish, not a misery

12

Anna Mehler Paperny

you’ve inflicted on those you love most, but a fatal final symptom of
a disease that’s destroying you. Which, sure. Fine. But seeing my
younger brother’s face in that psych ward after he’d flown in from
his first weeks of law school convinced me I deserved to die in the
most torturous way imaginable. Loving people so much it hurts
doesn’t necessarily negate the need to die; it just makes you hate
yourself more for all the pain you cause, makes you feel your death
would be a gift.
Recollections return in uneven swatches. Sleeping pills, even
when taken as directed and not downed like peanuts, are one hell
of an amnestic. Now, when I try to pull memories forward from
mental recesses for reinspection, I find them frayed and mothmunched, viewed through a lens messily smeared with Vaseline.
Some reappear in high definition much later: the way I tried to read
a book in my ICU bed only to find the words bounce as my squinted
eyes stung and watered, unfocused.
“This is a shitty book,” my mom claims I said.
I owe Patrick deWitt an apology: I can’t look at the original cover
of The Sisters Brothers without a shuddering flashback to the pain
behind my eyes, the panic of being unable to read. This in all likelihood was an aftereffect of the antifreeze, which, if it doesn’t kill you,
can make you permanently blind. This inability to comprehend the
written word was mercifully short-lived; I don’t know how I’d have
coped otherwise, thus disoriented and unmoored.

After two or thr ee days in the ICU they put me in the shortterm psych ward. I toddled over in that sky-blue dignity-depriving
hospital gown, changing in the bathroom into civilian attire. The
psych ward had no windows and no privacy, just beds separated by
curtains sliding on rods.
I was so out of it when first ushered in from the ICU that nothing
registered. Surely I’d leave soon. Surely I’d be back at work in no
time. A return to the newsroom that centered my universe was all

When You Try to Die and Don’t

13

I needed, I told myself. Find a way out. Everything will return to
normal.
Or not. There were Forms to contend with. I had just become one
of a growing number of psych patients kept in the hospital against
their will—I was put on a form formalizing my committal by a doctor
deeming me too crazy to make my own decisions.
Every jurisdiction in Canada, the US, and much of Europe still
has some kind of medical legal framework for dealing with people
who lack insight into their conditions or lack the capacity to make
decisions. You can put someone in the hospital against their will if
a doctor decides—sometimes at the urging of police, a judge, or
family members—that they’re in danger of causing imminent harm
to someone, including themselves. (Important to note: They still
have rights when you do this, and when you take away some rights,
protecting the others becomes more important than ever. More on
that later.) In Ontario,1 where I live, it begins with a Form 1,2 which
subjects you to a seventy-two-hour “hold” that allows for a psychiatric assessment. By the time I toddled into the short-term psych
ward, the seventy-two-hour hold that I’d been placed on in the ICU
had just about run out, necessitating a new one: a Form 3 this time,3
which allowed me to be kept against my will for two weeks. I was
too out of it to know this and nobody told me until days later, giving
me the sinking feeling of being suddenly trapped.
There are two primary reasons why you’d be upgraded to a
Form 3. One is that you’re incapable of consenting to treatment
but you’ve been treated and got somewhat better before and they have
reason to believe, based on that prior experience, that you really need
that treatment now or your condition will seriously deteriorate. But
“deterioration” is pretty broad and subjective. So that significantly
increases the pool of people eligible for involuntary hospitalization—
which is either a boon to patient health or a draconian way to lock
more people in the hospital, depending whom you ask.
The other reason, my reason, is that they’re fairly certain you have
a mental disorder and there’s a serious risk of someone getting

14

Anna Mehler Paperny

seriously hurt or impaired. It has two key subcategories: “Bodily harm
to the patient” and “Bodily harm to another person.” The seeming
fungibility of that check-mark differentiation—Does this crazy person
pose a threat to themselves or to other people? Should I be scared for
them, or of them?—is what freaks out so many when it comes to
people with mental illness. It’s what tormented me at the time, certified by that form, even with the “harm to others” box unchecked.
Some assume people with mental illness are going to kill them,
or attack them, or commit some horribly violent, depraved act without warning or reason. We assume this despite centuries of evidence
to the contrary. People with mental illness are far more likely to be
victims of violence than its perpetrators.4 When they get the treatment they need they’re highly unlikely to hurt anyone.
I thought I understood that. Until I realized, that day in that
hospital, how scared I became of myself. No one checked off that
“danger to others” box on my form. Only the “danger to self.” But
the two boxes are so close together! Just its paperwork proximity
was enough to convince me I posed a threat without even realizing
it. Was I going to hurt people against my inclination? Was I a murder-­
suicide risk? No, my doctor would emphatically tell me in the
months following. Of course not. But unconscious biases run deep,
and this wracked me for a while.
But in the immediate term, this crazy-person paperwork meant
I couldn’t leave the hospital. I couldn’t leave the ward without an
eagle-eyed escort. I couldn’t shave. I couldn’t charge my recently
returned cell phone without supervision. I entered a bad Groundhog
Day remake. Over the course of five-ish days in the short-term ward,
I murmured the same thing in the same chastened tone to an endless parade of health care workers armed with clipboards: a slim
nurse with an eyebrow ring, not much older than I was; an affable
social worker; another nurse who told me about his wife and their
efforts to have kids and who remembered me, years later, when I was
back as an outpatient; the staff psychiatrist who was there less often
but who, when she was, was clearly in charge.

When You Try to Die and Don’t

15

I repeated it sitting on my bed, dutifully completing my daily
suicidality checklist: “It was a one-off.” I repeated it sitting on the
almost comfortable couch of the glassed-off rug-floored consult
room (“I thought I wanted to die because I thought I felt hopeless.
I don’t feel that way anymore.”) I repeated it crouched by the low
coffee table laden with coping-strategy worksheets and dated magazines in the common area (“It was such a dumb thing to do. I realize that now. I wish I hadn’t done it. I won’t do it again.”). I repeated
it so much I believed it myself.
So much for my model-patient alibi. What do you tell the people
you love about the thing you did that caused them pain? You have
abashed phone conversations with your Calgarian grandparents. You
lie to your aunt when she makes you promise you’ll never try again.
You hold your breath and avoid the topic altogether. My mother’s
mom, the Los Angelena Auschwitz survivor and the strongest nonagenarian you’ve ever met, I’ve never told, although my mom told her
years later, a harrowing impulsive disclosure and a brutalizing thing
for her to hear. She’s ninety-four and I still feel ashamed just talking
to her, the epitome of life’s triumph against all odds, having expended
so much time and effort and brainpower toward my own death.
From the moment of my arrival at the crisis ward, I studiously
avoided shared spaces: the big table where patients congregated to
watch the boxy dolly-mounted TV; and later, in the next ward I’d be
admitted to, the TV and activity rooms where patients buzzed or
lolled or sat. Introverted at my best, I spent my institutionalized time
impotently attempting to construct personal spaces. Of course there
is no me-space in a hospital, certainly not if you’ve been certified
as posing a danger to yourself. No corner behind curtained dividers
or unlatchable doors to effectively mark one’s own. As my eyes
improved, I resorted to my childhood proclivity for disappearing
into books, pulling my consciousness through that escape hatch and
shutting it behind me.
I was hardly a sociable patient, hardly the one to get psych-­
evaluation bonus points for successful interpersonal interactions.

16

Anna Mehler Paperny

Hardly the insatiably curious inveterate reporter I’d fancied myself
before entering that building.
I encountered insomnia without end, twisting on squeaky hospital linen, shallow sleep interrupted by what I thought was the
rolling sound of gurneys thundering through hallways but turned
out to be the trundling pneumatic whoosh of specimens, samples,
medication sent from one ward to another through a tube system
within the walls. When I could sleep I’d dream I was trapped and
tied down in a maze-like Mengele hospital where maniacs conducted sadistic experiments. It was almost a relief to be roused in
the morning by nurses bearing thermometers and blood pressure
cuffs. Almost, but for the perma-fatigue that lodged itself in my
joints and behind my eyes.
I grew to love the hospital’s intercom announcements. Code Blue
for cardiac arrest; Code White for a violent patient; Code Yellow for
a missing person, an elopee, as they’re called, a runaway for whom
I’d silently cheer. Go, sixty-eight-year-old Caucasian man with short
brown hair last seen wearing hospital pants and a brown wool cardigan
and no shoes! Run!
Days were divided between Visiting Hours and Everything Else.
My baby sister flew in, too beautiful and young and on the cusp of
life to have to worry about this shit barely a month after I’d schlepped
a printer uphill to her McGill University residence in Montreal. The
five of us—my parents, brother, sister, and I—went outside the hospital for meals and pretended everything was fine. We went for a late
brunch on Queen Street West and sat in a corner table by the window
and all ordered variations on the same huevos rancheros and my dad
bought a stranger’s black-and-white photos. Their outward resilience
and our collective ability to laugh at the most horrible things helped
me get through without choking on my own guilt.
These escorted outings were not carefree ones for my parents.
“We were both happy to be there for you . . . but at the same time
scared shitless,” my dad said, years later. “You once went into the
bathroom at a Queen Street restaurant where we were out for dinner

When You Try to Die and Don’t

17

and suddenly we were terrified that maybe you took a knife to the
bathroom and were going to try to kill yourself again while on an
escorted leave from the hospital.”
(I was oblivious to this. I just went to the bathroom.)
And my friends. I’d done nothing to deserve such stalwarts.
Brendan brought me fancy overpriced sandwiches on the first day I
was allowed a chaperoned out-of-ward excursion. I stood facing
south on a bench in a green-space-cum-smoking-area near one of
the hospital’s entrances, fingertips upstretched to touch a vine-laced
wooden trellis as I blinked like a mole rat in the honeyed evening
light. I’d never had a brisket sandwich before and it remains the most
delicious bread-based thing I’ve ever consumed. I hoarded half of
it for later only to have it confiscated by well-meaning nurses who
seemed to interpret my sentimentality in a more pathological way.
Omar, my closest friend and the most masochistic individual I
know, came to the hospital every goddamn day, even after I was
moved upstairs to the ward for serious crazies. Every day! He signed
me out and took me wandering through hospital hallways as I hyenalaughed uncontrollably, so stupid-glad to be with someone I loved
who wasn’t running away despite all available evidence and common
sense and instinctive self-preservation advising the contrary. (The
only evening he missed was the day Steve Jobs died, because he had
to write about it.5 Wesley came and braved the upstairs psych ward
in his stead.) And as long as I returned from these brief respites to
sign back in before my time was up, everything was OK. Pushing it
once, trying to fit in two sign-outs too close together, aroused enough
suspicion to temporarily cost me chaperoned sign-out privileges. I
was left sulky and prowling for thirty hours, starved for fresh air.
Most of my psych-ward time was deadly cabin fever: marathon
pacing, ear-splitting earbud music, books that were never escapist
enough to hold my splintered attention for long. So despite attempts
to retreat within myself, I got to know my fellow patients.
A Hispanic woman had family come visit en masse. They trooped
in armed with pastries and tamales, filling the common area with

18

Anna Mehler Paperny

chatter and warmth. She was one of the few inpatients who got many
visitors. Watching the way she swelled with love when they were
near, the way she wept later, alone and deflated, made it seem imperative that everything in her world turn out OK.
In the curtained bed space next to mine was an elderly woman,
grey hair in a long braid slung over her shoulder. Her sling-clad arm
was lined lengthwise with a thick spiderweb of angry black stitches
I could not stop staring at. I’d imagine the scene at her home as
she bled—did she call 911 herself? Had she changed her mind, was
the sight of her own blood too much to bear? I knew she lived alone
because I overheard a social worker talk to her at one point about
learning to prepare her meals with one arm. She approached me one
morning in the liminal space between our cubbyholes and asked
me to adjust her sling and I tried to hide my fixation on her arm as
I slipped the fabric into a slightly less uncomfortable space bracketing elbow and shoulder. (Following a knee surgery years later, I found
the same sutures, a pair of baleful black knots, in my own skin while
replacing one set of waterproof Band-Aids with another. Was astonished at the degree to which they froze me, took me back to that
forlorn wrinkled old lady with the long grey hair and the thick
spidery stitches crawling up her forearm. Did she have to go back
to the hospital to get them removed, as I did mine? Did she make the
appointment? Follow-ups are a bitch at the best of times; surely far
worse when it’s to untie the sutures undoing your effort to die.)
At night her moans of discomfort roused me from whatever light
doze I could manage, till I prayed for one or both of us to just shut
up and die. In the morning, remorse at my murderous callousness
prompted me to slip her, at her request, the packets of salt from my
meal tray—she got none, for health reasons. Was I undermining her
long-term wellness? Maybe. But when you’re old and alone and in
pain and stuck in the hospital after trying to slit your wrist, surely
there are more important things to worry about than sodium intake.
A nurse-chaperoned trip down to the hospital’s belly for a brain
scan felt like a vacation. I spent interminable minutes in a luminescent

When You Try to Die and Don’t

19

white Space Odyssey cocoon whose broad vocabulary of echoing
blurps and bloops mimicked the sound effects of a retro sci-fi film.
I learned the less-than-uplifting result of this diversion days later.
An otherworldly neurologist—wide blue eyes growing wider, syncopated Scandinavian-accented voice slowing as she spoke—walked
me through a series of white blobs I was told depicted my brain.
A dangly blob at the center of the bird’s-eye image she introduced
to me as my putamen, located near the bottom of the brain itself. It
was swollen thanks to the antifreeze I’d swallowed. I learned through
later googling that, once in your system, the methanol in antifreeze
metabolizes into formic acid, which can prevent your cells from grabbing and using the oxygen they need, ultimately killing you within
about thirty-six hours.6 Your optic nerve and basal ganglia are among
the first bodily bits badly damaged in this process—either directly
poisoned by formic acid or suffocated by lack of oxygen. Depending
how badly damaged they are, you could be blind or shaky and off balance for the rest of your life. I did not know this when I gulped that
blue liquid. My pre-attempt googling fixated only on the prospect of
death, not debilitation. I’d gone for what seemed both efficacious and
accessible, with little thought for side effects. Smart!
I was unreasonably lucky, the neurologist told me, in a tone that
suggested I should not tempt fate again: The damage to my basal
ganglia was probably temporary, she advised. (She also advised me
to avoid booze for the next several months. What, you mean other than
methyl alcohol?) That swollen dangly blob, my putamen, explained
my greater-than-usual klutziness; a damaged optic nerve could
explain the watery stinging in my eyes every time I tried to focus.
My swollen putamen also sabotaged my hands when I needed them
most. For weeks I wrote and typed with agonizing, disorienting
slowness, cramped fingers and crabbed letters not my own.
That panicky self-alienation dissipated after a couple of months,
and by January follow-up brain scans found my putamen had recovered as much as it ever will. I discovered soon after that I could no
longer pull off high heels when I toppled over like a drunken pygmy

20

Anna Mehler Paperny

giraffe while walking fifty yards to a wedding venue. Red-faced and
mortified I picked myself up, cradling my miraculously unshattered
camera, and avoiding eye contact, slunk back to the vehicle I’d carpooled in to retrieve a pair of flat sandals. (For the record, I temporarily relearned how to walk in heels for my baby brother’s 2017
wedding and remain absurdly proud of myself for not sprawling
across the aisle or crushing small children on the dance floor.) Some
necrotic-looking scar tissue remains, nerve fibers stripped of their
white myelin insulation. Insidious symptoms persist: I still get
freaky limb microtremors, jackhammer legs, shaky hands that shake
more thanks to certain psychotropic medications I’ve taken on and
off for the past several years. Three and a half years later, back in the
hospital following—SPOILER ALERT—another suicide attempt,
a bemused doctor approached my ICU bed, scans in hand, wondering how a woman in her late twenties had the brain of a stroke
victim. That’s apparently what medical images of my brain look like
to people who aren’t expecting to encounter methanol’s neurological souvenirs.
Back in the psych ward, I was acutely aware of my involuntary
status and irrationally resentful of anyone there with me who was
effectively free to go at any time. A young bearded man who’d voluntarily checked himself in to the short-term psych ward spent
extensive amounts of time on the hospital phone talking about how
he’d just needed some time to decompress, you know? He held forth at
length on the quality and quantity of food he consumed and its variegated effects on his digestive system. It’s vital for voluntary admission to be available to people in crisis—it’s infinitely better than the
alternative, of resources being unavailable or only available on an
involuntary basis. But goddamn, I was so jealous.
Form 3 or no, I was sure if I just acted normal enough they would
let me go. I tried to be courteous, lucid, and calm but not suspiciously
upbeat. I didn’t weep or scream at my own frustration or impotence
or exhaustion or insomnia or self-loathing. I met, as required, multiple
times a day with nurses and social workers. And my I’m-totally-fine,

When You Try to Die and Don’t

21

suicide-was-a-one-time-aberration ploy almost worked: I was almost
set free by the first psychiatrist I saw within a week of my admission
without so much as a follow-up appointment.
I admit we got off on the wrong foot with that first psychiatrist.
This could be because my family and I misjudged her appetite for
jokes. The six of us—me, parents, siblings, psychiatrist—had a painful group session involving questions about not just me but family
practices and dynamics. (I learned later on that my parents, as family
members grasping for information and a meaningful sense of participation in their loved one’s care, found this group session more
useful than I did.) When substance use came up I recall my dad
saying something along the lines of, “Do we drink? Oh, yeah. Allllll
the time.” And then we all chuckled while the psychiatrist sat stonefaced and made notes that, I later learned, branded us all alcoholics.
Let me be clear: My family drinks regularly, especially when together.
But none of us drink destructively. We don’t get antsy-distressed
when we go without booze. Clearly this is something I should have
paused our psych-session wisecracking to clarify before the woman
pathologized us all.
Anyway.
My discharge was scheduled, it shone like a beacon, with nothing more for me to deal with than a list of phone numbers of private
pricey psychotherapists and the Center for Addiction and Mental
Health, whose wait list for a publicly covered post-suicide psy­chiatric
consultation stretched past six weeks. I dutifully made these calls
from behind my blue curtain, voice comically lowered as I shamefully booked appointments with several psychotherapists I hoped
my employer would pay for even as I recoiled from the idea of couchbound confessions, knowing I’d distance myself from everything to
do with this horrid experience as soon as possible.
Incidentally, discharging inpatients who have mental disorders
requiring ongoing treatment with a series of phone numbers and a
pat on the head is not considered best practice: It’s a great way to
ensure people fall through the cracks and (if they’re lucky) wind up

22

Anna Mehler Paperny

back in hospital in worse shape than before. St. Joe’s, the hospital
where I stayed, now has a mental health outpatient clinic that focuses
in part on catching people at risk of death or deterioration as they
head back into the community. Hooking people up with ongoing
care, making the transition as seamless as possible, makes for better
outcomes—and, hopefully, fewer fatally shitty ones. Yet somehow
ensuring smooth psych transitions remains the exception, not the
rule. It’s a hospital-dependent crapshoot.
My parents—who’d been driven nuts by the sense of enforced
helplessness and ignorance they had to live with as family members
of mental patients who by law retain their right to privacy—thought
setting me free less than a week after a suicide attempt was a bad
idea. We had a bruising shouting match, pacing back and forth in
sinking damp sand by Lake Ontario, near the path we walked during
my all-too-brief afternoon chaperoned psych-ward reprieves, arguing over whether I should live with them in Vancouver on my release.
I wanted to go home to my apartment. But I admit my argument was
less than compelling:
“I’m fine!”
“That’s what you said before you tried to kill yourself.”
“But now I really am fine!”
My parents won that argument, albeit not in the way they—or
I—expected.

3
Psych-Ward Sojourn
Unbeknownst to me, as I paced by my bed and prepared for life
outside the windowless ward, my parents had pushed for a second
opinion, my dad writing desperate, pleading emails at three o’clock
in the morning. And they got one.
The second psychiatrist was smart and sardonic and treated me
like someone capable of communicating in multisyllabic sentences.
He also had a far better bullshit detector. He did not buy my argument that this whole suicide thing was an anomalous one-off, a
mental misunderstanding, never to recur. He decided I had major
depression. And that I was fucked up enough to merit more time
locked up lest I try to off myself again.
So much for my “suicide, shmuicide” master plan. The people
charged with keeping me alive were not so easily convinced.
Years later I still resent his decision to keep me locked up, even
though his intervention also earned me invaluable outpatient care
and years of life-ameliorating, arguably lifesaving treatment. He
also got me started on meds, the beginning of a years-long pill-­
popping parade, on which more later. This was the doctor I would
see as an outpatient, who would help me stay alive in the most basic
way for years. But I still don’t think I needed more time in a mental
institution—I think I could have started one-on-one outpatient
pharmaco- and psychotherapy sooner and skipped the extra time

24

Anna Mehler Paperny

in the ward and gotten more benefit from it without risking another
self-administered death. He still contends that keeping me in a psych
ward was the right move because I was at a high risk of attempting
suicide after what he concluded was a serious and premeditated
attempt—apartments don’t get to that state in a day, and telling him
gulping antifreeze was a freak impulsive act “would have been a
whole lot easier to argue if you drove a car,” he said. My attempt at
a model-patient persona was not how people who attempted suicide
on impulse tend to act. Letting me go at that point “would have been
a premature discharge.” And premature discharges in all contexts
are of course to be avoided.
But at the time I just about broke down. Agape as my discharge—
which was scheduled, which I’d prepped for—was delayed, I struggled
to process the prospect of more time without freedom of movement,
more sleepless hospital nights. I squandered precious visiting hours
pacing the three-step space along my bed. In hindsight I can see it
seems an overreaction but at the time I was distraught, unable to bear
the company of loved ones who could come and go as they chose.
Within hours of my getting the unwelcome news, a well-meaning
patient advocate whose business card I promptly lost took me aside
and explained I could appeal, if I wanted, to the Consent and
Capacity Board. That board, he explained, made up of psychiatrists,
lawyers, and laypersons, is where you go when there’s a disagreement
over how crazy you are or who should get to decide on treatment if
a patient themselves can’t. I later found its caseload more than
­doubled in the decade ending in 2016–17:1 the biggest portion of its
applications (46 percent in 2016–17) dealing with patients’ involuntary status. The onus is on the attending doctor, the one who put you
on the Form, to prove you should be there. I spent a day considering
trying to challenge my commitment. By this time I’d been in the
hospital just over a week, but I still hoped somehow good behavior
would earn me a clean bill of health and quicker return to the newsroom. (Also, by then I’d lost that guy’s card.)
So I got myself set to move to the long-term psych ward upstairs.

Psych-Ward Sojourn

25

I packed the too many belongings I’d accumulated—books and
clothes, but also the rosemary plant from my mother, the stuffed
monster and fuzzy slippers from friends—into too few plastic bags.
With a nurse at my side I trekked upstairs, looking every bit a disheveled bag lady—a parody of a poor soul who belongs somewhere
closed off and sedated.

The seventh-floor psych war d—7M, it’s called—was a
converted brick-gabled nunnery at the top of the hospital. And I will
give it this: It had a lovely view, catching morning sun and evening
sun and the glinting, traffic-rimmed Lake Ontario to the south. I got
a chance to admire this view for the first time as I fidgeted in the TV
alcove while my possessions were taken away and protractedly
combed through. I stood by a window near the bland square side
table and the unstainable blue-green L-shaped couch, avoiding eye
contact with the patients watching TV beside me or reading, sitting
and staring, or playing games in the larger adjoining activity room,
used breakfast trays stacked in a tall wheeled cart in the corner. They
let me keep my shoelaces and earbuds but confiscated spare hair
elastics and charger cords, along with the nail polish my younger
sister had given me and the jar of apple butter from my mother—part
of her ongoing attempt to make my psych-ward sojourn as homey as
possible. Unquenchable nesting instinct! Were I on death row or
locked in solitary I’m certain she’d bring me a potted plant, yoga mat,
prints for the walls or a beach-glass mobile to hang from the ceiling.
The nurse who led me to my latchless, off-white room advised me
to keep all my possessions locked for safekeeping in the vertical cupboard to which the nurses kept the key.
“Oh, are many things stolen here?”
“Oh, yes.”
The sureness of her response, that implied inevitability of theft,
sparked an immediate suspicion of my fellow inmates. Unwarranted:
The only thing anyone ever stole from my room was some fruit.

26

Anna Mehler Paperny

My quarters resembled, really, a spartan university dorm room:
bed, desk, chair, cupboard/wardrobe. On the walls were scrawled
disappointingly uncreative rants, much of it written in the same ballpoint pen, mostly combinations of homages to and warnings against
Satan. I spent too many time-killing hours engaged in morbid handwriting analysis, comparing the sole penciled set of rantings to the
satanic ballpoint pen. Same person, different implement? Different
person, same crazed uncreativity? The myth of the mad creative
genius makes for good narratives but in my experience it’s a myth.
I know brilliant people who have mental illness but the latter is a bug,
not a feature. Psychic torment punches you in the face and crowbars
you in the knees; it doesn’t make you Mensa magic. Maybe some
lucky nutbars have the productive-creative-brilliant brand of crazy.
But the only reason it seems an inordinate number of artsy genius
types are crazy is because you never hear from us normal crazy people.
All those tortured brainiacs are far outnumbered by poor fuckers
who’re just tortured. Mental illness made me incurious, inert. I
retreated into myself. I struggled to write. I could not take notes,
despite my grandmother’s advice. Even outside the hospital, in the
months before my first suicide attempt and the years afterward, the
deepening of suicidal despair drowned out any creativity or curiosity
I thought I had even as I struggled to keep pitching, keep chasing,
keep filing. My handwriting’s never been legible but my swollen putamen made my hand muscles seize up and rebel. To see words I’d written sprawl unrecognizable like pulverized mosquitos across a page
was terrifying and disorienting and made me even more reluctant to
record anything.
The bed was pushed lengthwise against the east-facing window
whose lower half, for some reason, was tinted. I caused one poor
nurse minor panic when I stood on the bed for a better view of the
traffic wormtrails seven stories below, leaving only part of my torso
(the strangulation-by-hanging part, right?) visible from the hallway
through the small window in my door. But there were precious few
ligature opportunities to be had in that convent enclave. Not that I

Psych-Ward Sojourn

27

was actively looking, but it was hard not to think about, a niggling
errand you’d rather ignore but that keeps presenting itself, in the same
way I joked with Omar about testing the tensile strength of the headphones they let me keep. I really was joking but also wondered—
could I use them?
None of the doors locked and they didn’t latch shut properly
either—not mine, not the washroom’s, not the shower room’s where
the wooden urine-scented bench lent a deceptively sauna-y air of
class, as though it belonged in the mountain château of a senile,
eccentric old man. Showers were a daily failed attempt to put my
change of clothes somewhere they wouldn’t get soaked; I wasn’t
about to trudge through that hall wearing nothing but a hospitalissued towel.
To enter the ward from the seventh-floor elevator you needed to
be beeped in by whoever was (wo)manning a nurses’ station beyond
the heavy locking glass doors with their watch for elopees sign.
No one eloped, or tried to, while I was in that ward. I kept wishing
someone would.
The tiled whitish hallway leading to the patient rooms smelled
eternally of piss thanks to an incontinent, bedridden, birdlike old
lady across from the nurses’ station. The space was nonetheless perpetually teeming with patients milling about or waiting to use the
phone or seeking a nurse’s attention. We were each assigned a nurse
in the morning, based on who was working that day, names written
in blue on a whiteboard like awkward workplace team-building
assignments. Each nurse had a handful of inpatient charges and you
were supposed to address any concerns/complaints/requests to
your designated nurse of the day. Attempting to talk to anyone else
elicited a terse “I am not your nurse!” and a quickly receding back.
I know you don’t want a bedlam of patients shouting at random
people in uniforms. But this felt damn infantilizing.
The doors to everyone’s room were rarely open unless there were
nurses inside checking vitals or administering meds or haranguing
ambulatory patients out of bed. You’d think a psych ward would be

28

Anna Mehler Paperny

the one place it’s acceptable to stay in bed and wallow in your own
misery. But no. Orderlies changed sheets and garbage and, if you
caught them at the right time, your towel for a fresh one. One nurse
showed me the rumbling industrial washer and dryer down the hall
where they washed the linen and where I could do my own laundry.
Never before or since has this seemed such a privilege.
There was a caged-off balcony facing south, toward the highway
and the water, which was open to inmates for a few minutes a day if
we could successfully prevail upon the nurses. I gazed at the Gardiner
Expressway and longed to be stuck among the glittering lines of
vehicles stretching east and west alongside the shining surface of
Lake Ontario. During one of these all-too-brief moments of fresh
air I struck up a conversation with the woman in charge of the hospital’s psych wards, who’d come to the seventh floor for a brief visit.
We talked about her responsibilities at the hospital, about her cat and
her Thanksgiving plans. The exchange ended abruptly when the
nurses ushered everyone back inside and I was reminded I was not
an independent person, not a curious reporter, but a crazy person on
a Form who could not be trusted on her own.
One exception to my studious avoidance of fellow inmates—
a foray into the long-term psych ward’s common room to play
Scrabble—ended abortively when my opponent’s word choices
took a turn for the rapey. I freaked and retreated to my unlockable
room. (I should add, in fairness, I was never given any concrete
reason to fear for my safety while an inpatient. Most of the other
psych-ward denizens were much more sociable and solicitous than
I was. But this was an unnerving moment in an unnerving setting,
so. On the bright side, I didn’t get a chance to lose: I suck at Scrabble.)
The ward psychiatrist would call each of us in for periodic chats
in a cramped bright space between the elevator and the common
room. “How is your mood?” she’d ask each time, and I tried to sound
just upbeat enough for my reply not to ring fake (“I saw the sunrise
this morning! It was beautiful!”).
I don’t know what kind of treatment most of my fellow inmates

Psych-Ward Sojourn

29

were getting. Apart from those psychiatric chats there were mandatory life-skills activities like the nutritional bingo delivered by an
overly perky, heavily pregnant young woman whose cheery patience
was wasted on most of us. I saw a couple of patients frighteningly
woozy on meds, but that was it. More than anything else the place
felt like a holding pen—a drunk tank for crazy. You could be there
for weeks or months but it wasn’t a place you were meant to live.
I spent most of the vast empty stretches between visiting hours
reading in my room or reading on the floor, tucked into a semi-sunny
corner beside the glass balcony door, a sad-eyed hound hoping someone will notice her and let her out (it was here I fell in love with Esi
Edugyan’s fiction). The lack of agency was the worst, of course. That,
and the lack of privacy. That, and the lack of fresh air that almost
drove me to start smoking so at least I could steal a bit of extra time
outdoors for nurse-chaperoned nicotine outings. (I’ve since been
informed those no longer exist. Too many elopees.)
Shortly after my move to 7M a senior editor from the paper came
to visit. Old-school, in charge of something amorphous like the
newspaper’s editorial standards, stern seeming unless you knew her.
She came in the late afternoon or early evening and I got my parents
to sign me out of the nuthouse so I could meet her in the cramped
ground-floor hospital coffee shop instead of the psych ward’s septicantiseptic common room.
I was petrified. I’m sure it showed. But god, that visit meant so
much it beggars verbalizing. She came and brought chocolate and
newsroom gossip and we sipped coffee and talked about news and
politics and who’d had a baby, who was out of his depth in a new job.
And I remember palpably trembling, from meds or anxiety or both,
and praying she didn’t notice and that I didn’t seem too crazy (Do I
seem crazy now? How about now? Howaboutnow?). If I did she was gracious enough not to let on. At one point I tried to clumsily apologize
without really specifying what for: Neither of us had uttered the word
suicide and I certainly wouldn’t be the one to haul it into a conversation teetering perilously on the cordially sane. She brushed it off:

30

Anna Mehler Paperny

“Everyone’s allowed a couple of screwups.” “This is a pretty big
screwup.” She laughed. We talked about my return to work as though
it were a real, imminent thing, not a delusional fantasy. I said the doctors thought being posted to a foreign bureau would be therapeutic.
She laughed. I pretended that what I interpreted as the laughability
of that ambition wasn’t breaking my heart. I don’t know what it took
for her to come and visit me in the hospital. But I experienced it as a
gift, a superhuman act of kindness. It made me feel like a real person
with a vocation and aspirations to return to. I grasped at that feeling
in the days and weeks afterward, a bright thread in a dark labyrinth.

Democr acy is the best. I woke on Ontario election day with
devastation down my insides: I was supposed to be covering this
story, not watching it sidelong from a psych ward. But there was a
silver lining, under the circumstances: freedom. Canadian inpatients, like prison inmates, retain their right to vote even while
they’ve temporarily lost their right to freedom of movement. (Laws
in the US vary by state, but most allow voting via absentee ballot in
cases of personal emergency.) I unearthed my voter information
card, requisite identification and proof of address; negotiated an
extended leave—two consecutive hours!—from the psych ward and
walked to my polling station to cast a vote. Most of my ward didn’t
know an election was ongoing (notable exception: the wonderful
lady who bellowed, “Who won the election?” from her room the following morning), or knew they could vote, or where they could vote,
assuming they had a driver’s license, health card, mail addressed to
their permanent residence handy. Everyone who’d been committed
would have needed chaperones. I had the good fortune of being
accompanied by my parents, who took their guardianship role
verrrry seriously. They all but held my hand as we crossed the street.
I’ve always loved polling stations and ballot casting. But the normalcy, the heady sense of democracy in action is so much sweeter
when there’s no one asking you if you’re planning to end your life,

Psych-Ward Sojourn

31

if you’ve taken your meds, if you’re allowed to be out. To the genial
Elections Ontario workers I was just one more smiley voter, with a
slight tremor you’d only notice if you looked really closely.
On our way back, aglow with the glory of participatory democracy
and ready to leap to the barricades, we stopped at a discount grocery
store to pick up toiletries. Conditioner was on sale (a big deal when
you have long curly Wookiee hair) and I weighed the family-size bottles in my hands, wondering whether to buy a second. “Do it!” my
mom urged. “You’re going to be alive a long time!” At that moment,
in my mind, that cheery prognosis became a threat, a trap, a heavy
door clanging shut. I wanted to scream and run away, evade my own
powerlessness. I grabbed my conditioner and headed to the checkout.
Back on the ward, my best friend among the seventh-floor patients,
a jokey, grizzled man who wore loose drawstring pajama pants and
little else, was kind enough to change the channel on the wall-mounted
TV I couldn’t reach from hockey to the election coverage. He watched
the results trickle in with me, making racist remarks about the ethnicsounding names of various candidates. He bragged about his neardeath heroin overdoses, his karate-practicing grandchildren, the pot
he’d somehow managed to smuggle onto the ward.
Even an antisocial glued-to-her-book recluse like me needed an
ally for the twelve waking hours every day without visitors. Grizzly
Dude and I would bellow at each other down the off-beige hall, “What,
are you crazy?!” and guffaw as though we were world-class comedians
and not sad-sack psych-ward inmates. We tried and failed to muffle
our laughter at the bizarre weekly discussion circles, meant as an
opportunity for inmates to air living-condition grievances but really
more like a parody of Ken Kesey’s One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest.
When I didn’t materialize to grab my breakfast tray (which was every
morning: The food was consistently, comically awful; a mushy bland
caricature of hospital grub) he sometimes brought it to my room.
And then suddenly it was Thanksgiving, and we each got a pass
to escape the ward over the long weekend—he to stay with his mom
and attend her celebratory dinner, me to stay with my parents in the

32

Anna Mehler Paperny

place they were renting for the duration of my little meltdown. It was
a weird weekend. I still had to be chaperoned everywhere by a putatively responsible adult. My dad jogged along when I went for a run
in the morning; a coterie of friends picked me up and drove me to a
hiking spot outside the city and I stood in the parking lot with my
face upturned to the sun like I was attempting photosynthesis. I had
coffee with a coworker who told me we couldn’t be friends anymore,
not close friends, because it hurt too much. (Can’t say I blame her
but that just about broke me.) I tagged along with Omar to a painfully awkward corporate PR party—“Do you want to come with me
to this?” “Uh, this is Anna. Did you mean to call somebody else?”—
where bands squawked under circling colored disco lights in a firehazardous converted warehouse as I, newly teetotalling, nabbed
miniature hamburgers off serving trays. I had less agency over my
movements than at any time since I was eight years old, and felt it.
But the people I loved who upended commitments and turned their
lives inside out for me made those days bearable.
“We all felt if we could just show you how much we love you, how
much we need you in our lives . . . it might not make you better, but
maybe it would make you think twice about killing yourself,” my dad
told me years later.
The autumnal scenes from that weekend seem made for an idyllic montage in a cheesy movie. Misleadingly: Outpatient downtime
is a great opportunity to ruminate over your own monstrousness
and mistakes and the hurt you’ve caused people you claim to love.
I remember, vividly, lying on my side awake in bed, thinking for the
first time post-antifreeze how best to kill myself, the need pressing
like weight on a bladder. It was back.
My poor gorgeous siblings had decamped to school so it was a
muted Thanksgiving dinner. My parents took the opportunity to ask
me why I hadn’t left a note.
What do you say to that? I said it seemed presumptuous to try
to explain something I could sense would be inexplicable to the
explanation’s audience no matter what I said to try to justify causing

Psych-Ward Sojourn

33

this kind of hurt, knowing full well the hurt it would cause. I didn’t
say that note-leaving was not top of mind for me at that moment. But
it has been since then. It occupies my thoughts in the days and hours
when ending my life seems most urgently imperative. Who needs a
note? What do I say? Should I leave them in envelopes at home? Mail
them? What if I mail a note and then change my mind or screw up
my death? How gross would that be? I’ve asked my more morbidminded friends if they’d rather I left them a note but no one’s been
shameless enough to say. Does it make it better or worse, having a
note from someone whose suicide has left you grieving? (I’m genuinely curious. Answer in the comment section below!)
We stopped on our way back to hospital to pick up a sack of bulk
candy I’d promised Grizzly Dude. He was heartbreakingly pleased.

The long-ter m psych-war d residents were several levels
­c razier than the short-term ward’s patients. They also seemed to
interact and pal around more, perhaps because they were there long
enough to form friendships; perhaps because lunacy lowers social
inhibitions (when it doesn’t socially incapacitate you, as it did me).
One young man with schizophrenia paced the halls wild-eyed,
swearing under his breath for hours a day. He discomfited me at first
but was harmless, although he’s my primary suspect in the theft of
a bag of Honeycrisp apples from my room, going solely on the hearsay of my grizzly patient friend. Most were comparatively subdued,
moving between levels of lucidity. Most were men, most older than
me. One of the only exceptions was a tiny young woman with closecropped dark hair and a body of sharp angles, who had an eating
disorder and a strained relationship with her family.
One loud, gangly man who stood in the common area declaring
his schizophrenia (“I am schizophrenic, and so am I!”) was clearly a
regular. (I should maybe note that people with schizophrenia don’t
generally have multiple personalities.) He recalled previous incarnations of the ward’s amenities—apparently the TV had improved; the

34

Anna Mehler Paperny

pillows had not—when he served as jumpy secretary during weekly
patient meetings. He told everyone in detail about his fungally
infected foot, which needed its own special sandal. He stopped me
and a visiting friend one evening to loudly proclaim his views on gay
people (strongly disliked) and then Toronto mayor Rob Ford (strongly
liked, although he seemed to think Ford was premier). He had a habit
of staring at your chest and making grandiose rambling compliments,
then elucidating his love for his wife—same script each time. He
called his teenage son sometimes from the wall-mounted phone outside the nurses’ station. Asked him to visit, bring him foot cream and
other necessities. If the boy dropped by I didn’t see him.
I don’t envy anyone whose job it was to care for us in the longterm ward, babysitting a floor of complex, erratic, unwell individuals, many of whom would be better off elsewhere. There aren’t enough
intermediate- or long-term facilities for people who can’t care for
themselves but don’t need to be hospitalized (more on that later).
And my west-end Toronto hospital abuts Parkdale, a gentrifying
neighborhood of new immigrants, rising rents, trending restaurants,
scuzzy apartment buildings, huge old subdivided houses, and one
of the highest concentrations of people battling addiction and crippling mental illness in the country—the second-highest rate of psychiatric hospital visits in the fourth-largest city on the continent.2
A few months before my suicide attempt, in the spring of 2011,
Parkdale was terrorized by someone (or several people) attacking
mentally ill residents seemingly at random.3 I’d been living in the
neighborhood more than a year by the time that happened, a few lanes
of highway between me and the blue dish of lake, and loved the community. I never felt unsafe but knew parents of young kids who’d
found used needles in playgrounds. As so often happens, when the
area cleans up, its most vulnerable residents get pushed out. In recent
years rooming houses have been sold, rebranded, and subdivided into
micro-bachelor apartments renting for $1,300 a month.4 But this is
still where the services are—the community health centers, the legal
clinic, employment, and language and other social services—and this

Psych-Ward Sojourn

35

is where people grew up and found community so, as in any big city,
they stick around to the extent they can, to the extent there’s somewhere affordable and accessible to live or sleep or crash.
An inordinate proportion of my hospital’s psychiatric inpatients
were (are) homeless; many brought there by police, who I’ve been
told go out of their way to drop people off at this crisis unit rather
than others because of its rapid processing times. The hospital gets
more of these police drop-offs than any other facility in the city,
despite having far fewer psychiatric beds than other places, such
as the prominent Center for Addiction and Mental Health.5 I once
talked to a recovering lifelong alcoholic in Parkdale who, when he
was going through a particularly bad withdrawal, which happened
a fair bit, would try to get paramedics to take him to St. Joe’s rather
than elsewhere because he knew he’d be treated compassionately.
I still see people in the neighborhood—walking down the street,
waiting for a streetcar, grabbing a coffee or a sandwich—I recognize from the outpatient mental health clinic where I, too, am now
a regular. And some people keep checking themselves back in.
They’ve nowhere else to go. This is the home address they put on
whatever forms they’re required to fill out because it’s the closest
place they have. Many of the long-term ward’s inhabitants cycle
through endlessly—too needy to live alone, not needy enough to
need hospitalization, no one to advocate on their behalf for supportive housing and nowhere near enough social housing to go around.
There are a hundred thousand people on that waiting list in Toronto
alone.6 Housing, especially supportive housing—proven umpteen
times to improve health care, corrections, social outcomes7—is still
something we’re terrible at providing for those who need it most.
Surely, few groups of patients are as unpleasant by definition as
those whose disease targets their brains. If it’s weird waking to find
yourself in a different stranger’s care each morning, it can’t be much
more pleasant to be charged with caring for a cycle of erratic nutbars
with suboptimal hygiene practices. One friendly night nurse told me
he’d come to Canada to work in literature after winning awards for

36

Anna Mehler Paperny

his writing and translating in China. Turns out it’s easier to get a gig
as a nurse than as a Chinese–English translator though, so he went
back to school and swapped planned translations of Atwood, Richler,
Munro for shifts with pissy psych inpatients. I wish I’d asked what
he was reading. A Filipino Canadian nurse I tried unsuccessfully to
cajole into casting a ballot was worried her two kids would emerge
from college with degrees and no jobs.
I forgot everyone’s name.

At the end of my two-week Form 3, the “How is your mood?”
ward psychiatrist decided I was free to go. I’m not sure whether this
was motivated more by my progress or their need for beds. I didn’t
feel better, particularly; suicide didn’t seem like an immediate option
but nothing seemed like much of an immediate option. I hadn’t processed the prospect of putting my life back together. But I didn’t care.
The feeling of being No Longer Certifiable was fantastic. My parents
were coming to pick me up. They would help me find a new apartment and then decamp across the country to Vancouver. “The
hardest thing,” my mom later told me, “was leaving you [in Toronto]
by yourself. You were very independent and strong . . . but I also
wanted to look after you and keep you safe. But I couldn’t. . . .
“We came to realize how helpless we were, and that was—apart
from the fact of knowing that we could lose you at any time—that
was the hardest thing to deal with. . . . [Being] powerless in a role
where we felt it’s our responsibility to help you and keep you safe.”
Reading books about depression helped her feel informed, but
also terrified.
“You never want to accept the fact that your kid could kill herself.”
Long pause. “So I try to be positive. I don’t dwell on that too much.”

“I hope I never see you again,” my nurse of the day said. It was
sunny. I got my bike back. Everything was going to be OK.

4
What, Me Depressed?
You’ll want to know when and you’ll want to know why.
When everyday pissiness gave way to ineluctable despair.
Why I tried, repeatedly, to fix it by killing myself.
The answer is I don’t know. Not to any half-satisfactory degree.
Certainly not the second question. Not even the first, really. As much
as I wind my mind back in time I’m unable to locate the start of a
downward spiral. And every well-meaning therapeutic discussion
I’ve had attempting to dredge childhood trauma proves futile and
guilt-inducing. I’ve never been subject to anything awful enough to
warrant this mind-swallowing badness. I have a supportive, loving
family, had a happy childhood. I’m a very fortunate person. Only
problem is, I hate myself and want to die.
Mental illness, strictly speaking, doesn’t run in my family. Are
there people in my family a psychiatrist might diagnose with something like an anxiety disorder, if they got the opportunity? Probably.
And nothing prompts disclosures like one’s own very public, very
ugly mental breakdown: One relative admitted to me shortly after
my first suicide attempt her own bedridden-paralysis feeling; another
told me about her anxiety, which she successfully kept at bay with
tiny doses of a common antidepressant I wish worked that magic
on me; another took antidepressants for years, although by now
he’s taking such a wild combination of meds no one, his physicians

38

Anna Mehler Paperny

included, has any idea what most of them do or how they work
together.
But no one in my family has tried to kill themselves; no one’s had
a psychotic break. No one’s been hospitalized for psychiatric reasons.
I’d call us neurotic in the casual, layperson sense but I can’t point to
any pathological history that could give clues to my medical misery.
I don’t know where you’d mark my disorder’s germination:
When I began to have trouble waking up? (Maybe two years before
my first suicide attempt?) When I began to dread going in to work,
the thing that gave—gives—my life purpose? (Maybe eighteen
months before?) When the smothering sense of failure prompted
sporadic suicidal fantasies? (A year?) When those fantasies became
insistent, persistent, inescapable?
My mother goes much earlier, to my teenage years. “I don’t think
it just came out of the blue,” she said some seven years after that first
attempt. She recalls a teen who withdrew and stopped eating, just
about, for years. Who wore a back brace for scoliosis that became
painfully uncomfortable and made adolescent awkwardness excruciating. “So even though we weren’t maybe aware that what we were
dealing with was depression, I think there were indicators. It seemed
to me that you were dissatisfied with yourself from the time you were
a teenager.”
I’ve never liked myself much, as a person, and what my psychiatrist calls my “negative cognitive bias” probably stretches back to
childhood. But when did I lose my capacity for hope?
I know that the attempt, when it came, felt long overdue—an
inevitable, necessary step I couldn’t keep putting off.
But I wouldn’t have called myself depressed. Not when I decided
I had to die and felt that conviction grow in intensity over the course
of a year; not when my failed attempt left me in a psych ward answering awkward questions about my state of mind. The subsuming
despondence, the inescapable hopelessness and worthlessness, were
matters of fact: I existed without worth or hope.
Months before that first suicide attempt, presciently worried

What, Me Depressed?

39

colleagues propelled into action by self-threatening emails had
dragged me to the psych ER and browbeaten me into calling my
newspaper’s employee assistance program. Which I did, and set up
an appointment with a psychotherapist—for which I arrived, predictably, a half-hour late and which, predictably, I did not reschedule
when the receptionist told me I’d arrived too late to see the therapist.
I was relieved to have dropped the ball. Of course I couldn’t get treatment. My despair was a pit dug by my own failures, not a remediable
medical condition.
I couldn’t believe my problem was extrinsic. I wanted to die
because I was an idiot and could never improve, never move forward
or do better—not because I was sick and therefore locked in a skewed
perception of the world and myself within it.
It’s not just me. Again and again, people I’ve spoken to bring up
their sense of isolation, that theirs is a personal flaw unique to themselves, not something faced by others, certainly not something
fixable. Debilitation—that inability to get out of bed, to interact with
people—fuels self-revulsion. I loathed myself for the endless stasis,
projects unrealized and opportunities ungrasped. I felt I was expending all my energy on the most basic level of functioning and had
nothing to show for it—just years of going through the motions. And
the worse I felt, the less motivated I was to pursue treatments that
felt ineffectual.
So I resisted diagnosis. Even when a trained medical professional
with decades of clinical psychiatric experience sat across from me
informing me I had major depressive disorder, I resisted. “You have
depression” did not strike me as a plausible explanation for what I
was going through.

5
When Diagnosis Makes You Crazy
At first I resisted diagnosis because being diagnosed as mentally disordered meant more time spent hospitalized against my will. Sitting
perched on the short-term psych ward’s consult-room couch I was
so close to freedom I could see it in the light sneaking through the
hinges of the ward’s weighted grey auto-locking door and I knew I
had to be the most well-adjusted, healthy-seeming post-suicide girl
you’d ever seen. Of course I rejected diagnosis: In addition to believing my problems were of my own making, I believed that diagnosis
would keep me hospitalized indefinitely.
And I resisted because no one wants to be designated crazy
and all that comes with it: That litany of off-putting, erratic, socially
unacceptable behaviors; to be deemed dangerous, disposed toward
violence and harm, to freakish unpredictability. I didn’t want to be
considered damaged, unhinged from reality. The patent ass-­
backwardness of those assumptions doesn’t ease their stranglehold
on a society that minimizes the medical toll of mental illness while
maximizing its fear of those affected.
But maybe most of all I disdained my diagnosis because depression’s a weak name for a serious disease. (I use “disease” and “illness”
and “malady” as a layperson, more or less interchangeably in this book.)
You say “depression” and I think of Marvin the Paranoid
Android. That endearing, hyperintelligent robot from Douglas

When Diagnosis Makes You Crazy

41

Adams’s The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy boasts the buzzkill tagline, “I think you ought to know I’m feeling very depressed.” Marvin’s
a capable, dour, smart-aleck machine who solves foolish human problems even as he rolls his eyes at those humans’ silly fallibility. He isn’t
a knot of despair consumed by worthlessness and failure. Beneath
my external nope-I’m-totally-fine-please-discharge-me denial, I kept
thinking, That’s it? This emotional vacuum, this endless inescapable
joyless negation of hope is just depression? Are you joking?
People profess depression all the time. Gloomy weather, inadequate investments in public transit, politically expedient xenophobia, the endangered status of a green-haired turtle that can breathe
through its genitals1—they’re all “depressing.” It doesn’t help that
it’s entirely possible to experience many of the symptoms of depression without being psychologically unwell: You can be anxious, you
can doubt or reproach yourself, you can gain or lose weight, you can
have trouble sleeping—and not have depression.
The official-sounding medical term, major depressive disorder,
carries little extra gravitas, sounding more like the imaginings of a
fanciful hypochondriac, not a genuine illness that does real harm.
Surely, if what I had was a real disease and not simply justifiable
despair at my own failure, it had to be something more serious.
One of psychiatry’s most persistent bogeymen, dating to the
mid-twentieth century and the basis of a still-burgeoning antipsychiatry movement, is the fear of turning normal human emotions
into disorders.
But here’s the thing: If the way I feel is just part of being human,
for fuck’s sake give me death. I cannot countenance the assertion
that this hopeless chasm is simply an extreme on a spectrum of
healthy emotion. It has no relation, however distant, to sadness.
Sadness is a pain that reminds me I’m alive, that I’m an animal capable of emotion and a sense of loss. Despondence is the flat, parched
death of the soul. There’s nothing there.
My dad remembers the diagnosis differently. Remembers me telling him, while I was in that psych ward, that I’d been told I had
depression.

42

Anna Mehler Paperny

“Hearing you acknowledge that you were sick was a big turning
point, a really big moment. Because it wasn’t a doctor telling us, it
wasn’t [your mother] or I making that lay conclusion. It was you, I
guess, taking ownership of your own health and of your own state.
So we weren’t guardians of an unwilling individual anymore.
“By acknowledging you had an illness it was the first step you had
to take to begin your process of recovery, I guess. . . . I saw the antifreeze. I saw the empty bottle of sleeping pills. I saw the apartment
in disarray. I saw you literally fighting for your life as they tried to
get the poisons out of your body. I saw you hot and sweaty and suffering in that ICU bed for a day. I knew you were sick. But I guess
I was hoping that a diagnosis would lead to some kind of a cure. There
was hope for recovery because we knew what was wrong.”
It’s never been that simple.
If existing definitions are flawed, and diagnostic methods hit
and miss, the names we assign mood disorders often feel like a
smokescreen masking costly ignorance: We group symptoms and
call them an illness because we don’t know how else to define the
illness or address the symptoms.
This isn’t rocket science: Rocket scientists know how rockets
work. The best psychiatrists in the world know astonishingly little
about how the brain functions on a good day, let alone how it
becomes diseased and how to treat it when it does. They don’t know
where depression comes from, or precisely how to map it in the
brain, or why some interventions work, on some people, sometimes.
So where does that leave the diagnosed?

6
Killing Yourself Is Tougher
Than You’d Think
As I moped in the nunnery-cum–psych ward following my first blue
antifreeze–flavored attempt, I told myself and the psychiatrists
deciding whether I was sane enough to be set free that there was no
danger of my trying again. That, having failed so blatantly, with such
unpleasant (but extraordinarily fortuitous, under the circumstances)
aftereffects, even similar feelings of despair wouldn’t prompt me to
attempt death again. That, effectively, I’d exhausted that option and
was ready to move on to another, less lethal one.
I honestly believed this to be true. There’s nothing like marinating in the guilt and self-disgust of one’s botched suicide, wrapped in
an ass-displaying blue hospital smock as earnest health workers
monitor your blood pressure and probe your emotions, to convince
you that you never want to try anything like that again.
But then you’re out and all the awful comes rushing back.
No one tells you that after trying to kill yourself and failing miserably, you don’t necessarily wake up in the ICU feeling awesome.
No one tells you that, sometimes, you make it through two and a half
weeks in two mental wards and back to the newsroom you love, only
to be preoccupied with nothing so much as the wish you’d succeeded. Because everything that made you loathe yourself before
is still there. Except now you’re the crazy freak who can’t even kill

44

Anna Mehler Paperny

herself properly, who every morning takes meds that seem to do
nothing, who’s been away from work for a month and returns to pitch
stories to someone who found her passed out and overdosed in her
apartment. Chasing your vocation’s a powerful protective factor.
But being thrown back into it after an inpatient stay highlighted
the agonizing delta between the person I perceived myself to be
and the person I wanted to be.
I believe I wasn’t at an elevated risk of suicide in the immediate
aftermath of my first attempt. The weeks and months following, however, were another story.

For the r ecor d, I didn’t really try to kill myself again for another
year or so. I ducked down, powered through, tried to slough off the
torpor that hijacked most days. Then, in the wake of another immobilized morning, steeped in shame at the electoral financing article
I hadn’t filed, I tried to smash my bedroom window with my desk
chair. My chair is a lovely solid wooden thing. The windows in my
apartment don’t open—fruits of a compromise between the building’s developer and the owners of a rubber plant next door who worried about the effect their fumes would have on north-facing residents.
But I figured I could shatter that double-paned window and leap out
to my death seventeen stories below.
This did not work. Real-life windows are strong. I am not. Action
movies lie. After a few futile swings barely left a scratch, I gave up
and swallowed a month’s worth of lithium, which I’d been prescribed
at the time as an adjunct to antidepressants. Sat crouched by my bed,
waiting for death and ignoring friends’ frenzied phone calls wondering why I’d been incommunicado all day. Similarly ineffectual:
Fewer than fifteen minutes later my gastrointestinal tract’s gag-reflex
peristalsis betrayed me again. I was stuck sitting on my futon couch,
puke flecks studding my jeans, trying and failing to explain myself
to my poor beloved friends who’d finally barged in.

Killing Yourself Is Tougher Than You’d Think

45

I learned very quickly who was safe to confide in. Which friends
would judge, flee, insist on calling my parents or the police. Which
would listen, tell me they loved me, let me crash on their couch,
without getting me in trouble. Maybe it’s unfair—to sometimes
need someone to confide in while also needing that person to take
no drastic action in response to that confidence. But, again and
again, that’s where I found myself.
Then there were the asphyxiation attempts. I mutilated perfectly
good plastic bags in my clumsy attempts to seal them airtight around
my head with tape or elastic or knots only to realize I’d ripped holes
in the motherfuckers. Following one such endeavor I bawled on a
friend’s shoulder in the middle of the night on a bench in a bright-lit
twenty-four-hour supermarket, picking bits of scotch tape out of my
hair to a piped-in generic pop soundtrack.
I was a toxicological ignoramus with an illogical aversion to outright googling “ways to kill yourself at home without a gun or any
weight-bearing structure to facilitate strangulatory ligatures.” So I’d
do sidelong searches. “Toxic household chemicals.” “Fatal X overdose,” where X was whatever I was being prescribed at the time. I’d
look up academic papers for lethal doses of whatever substances
seemed easily obtainable and try to reverse-engineer blood concentration measurements to figure out how much of a given substance
I’d need to ingest. I spent eternal minutes in the aisles of cavernous
hardware stores, peering at warning labels and calculating how much
I’d have to swallow, how quickly, how long it would take to work.
Wondering if I looked as suspicious as I felt. I once bought a familysize pack of rat poison but couldn’t bring myself to down the piles of
pink and blue pellets sealed in clear plastic packets like heteronormative baby-shower loot bags. I tossed a fistful into a glass of water
to soak, as though I’d feel better about ingesting them in soggy
pablum form. They sat there bloating on the kitchen counter for a
couple of days before I dumped them out, washed the glass obsessively, pretended it never happened.

46

Anna Mehler Paperny

I tried paint thinner. Don’t try paint thinner. I managed to down
barely a cup (OK, maybe a cup and a half) before the oily viscosity
became too much.
I sat on my bed, looking out the window, trying to read Marjane
Satrapi’s graphic memoir Persepolis for more than an hour before I
admitted defeat. Wept, went for a walk. It sounds horrible to say
this but the conviction that one can’t kill oneself despite wanting
desperately to die is infinitely worse than the desire to die and the
intention to follow through. Planning suicide at least gives you
something to plan: Once that’s gone and the inclination remains,
you have nothing.
It’s from this abyss that I’d call a friend. Brendan, the first hapless
mofo to answer the phone post–paint thinner, was covering a baseball game—could he call back? I wandered outside, bathed in evening
light, palate coated with solvent. The fresh air reminded me I’d not
eaten all day. Devoured whatever junk was in the fridge and the
renewed gastric motility was enough to haul all that paint thinner
back up. (There’s a lot of puking in this book. I know. I apologize. But,
honestly: Poisoning’s the leading method of suicide and suicide
attempts among North American women. What were you expecting?)
Don’t try paint thinner. Even after expelling everything I could
I was burping solvent all night and much of the following morning.
Spent hours with sensory memory yanking me back to the woodstained sea-unworthy rowboat my brother, my dad, and I took out
on ill-advised Gulf Island fishing expeditions when we were kids. All
we ever caught was kelp and, once, a dogfish, but we more than made
up for it with Rip-L chip consumption.
I made a point of disclosing all death assays to my psychiatrist—
because what’s the point, really, of voluntary psychotherapy if you
bullshit your way through it? He in turn was very tolerant of my continued efforts to undermine his Sisyphean work. He did ask, though,
that out of courtesy I give him a heads-up when I bought toxic substances at the hardware store rather than after ingesting and regurgitating them. I’m not sure this was helpful, however:

Killing Yourself Is Tougher Than You’d Think

47

“Do you still have that jug of antifreeze in your closet?”
“Yeah.”
“After I told you to get rid of it?”
“Yeah.”
“Why?”
“It makes me feel better to have it around. Like, in case I need it.”
“. . .”
Technically, the paint-thinner incident resulted in my going to
hospital but I tell myself it doesn’t count because I went of my own
accord, as an outpatient and a horrible liar, after emailing my psychiatrist who urged me to call poison control. Which I did, the following morning, traces of solvent lingering at the back of my throat. The
voice on the other end freaked me out by demanding my name and
contact info, which makes sense if you want poison control to save
your life but is terrifying if you just tried to kill yourself and don’t
want anyone to find out and lock you up. The person urged me to get
checked out in case the vomiting rerouted any solvent to my lungs
where it would eat away at my alveoli, causing a fun kind of chemical
pneumonia. I acquiesced, reluctantly. Partly because I was scared for
my lungs but mostly because the poison control person now had my
name and contact details and I was loath to get in trouble. I tried to
appear nonchalant at the hospital, which is hard to do when you’re
waiting in the ER with the non-ER patients, driven hypochondriac
by the sniffles of others.
The scan results were fine.
“You have scoliosis,” the medical technician noted, eyeing the
image.
“Yes, I’m aware. Thanks.”
(Pro-tip: If you’re going to say you “accidentally” swallowed a
bunch of paint thinner—“‘Ingested’? Do you mean you inhaled it?”
“No, I mean ingested”—at least come up with a half-decent reason
you had it around. And why it was in a glass or mug or thermos or some
other container a reasonable person might accidentally drink out of.
And remember that reason long enough to get out of the hospital.)

48

Anna Mehler Paperny

Things might have gotten weird if the solvent had done any
measurable damage: Questions would have been asked for which
I had no truthful answers. But I was fine, my lungs looked fine. I
went home and tried to reconcile myself with the prospect of
remaining alive.
What do you do while waiting to die? Read, or try to. You want so badly
for it to end this way—apartment clean, phone off, sitting on your bed,
book in your lap, glancing out the window onto light and sun and life
below. But you’re impatient, easily bored: tough to lose yourself in fiction while anticipating a fatal hemorrhage. Less than an hour after
ingesting fifty thousand milligrams of aspirin, your first serious suicide
attempt in years, you give up; your appetite for waiting wanes to a sliver,
disappears. Self-discipline dissolved, you rise from bed, unlock your
laptop, turn phone back on. Email your doctor, poor fucker, because
you feel he should know and because in the vacuum of a botched attempt
at death you crave even the rotest response. Call a friend, intrude on
his workday, cause distress to someone you love because you need so
badly to hear someone’s voice, hear someone say, “I’m glad you’re alive.”
Compound that distress by refusing to go to hospital to get your blood
checked or stomach pumped.
“I’m fine.”
“But what if you’re not?”
“But I am.”
“What if you pass out and don’t wake up?”
So be it, you don’t say. So much the better. You don’t pass out. The
acid roils your bloodstream, rings in your ears, distorts your aural world
so for the next twenty-four hours everything sounds underwater. You
hold your nose and blow as though your blocked-cochlea feeling is an
altitudinal problem and not a drug-induced hearing loss. You lie on
your side in a chill sweat, swept with nausea, a thrumming ache behind
your eyes that finally abates and leaves you drained. The ringing persists. But you don’t pass out. You still don’t die.

Killing Yourself Is Tougher Than You’d Think

49

I was abashed at how stereotypically girly all my attempts were:
Women tend to go for poisoning, as noted; sometimes suffocation;
men shoot themselves or hang themselves or jump from high places.
Twice a day, on my bike ride to and from Global News, where I was
now working, I traversed a pair of bridges. Each time I eyed their
edges, trying to calculate whether they were high enough for a jump
to guarantee death. I expended brainpower wondering how to ensure
I’d hit the ground headfirst; it’d be just like me to klutzily fall wrong
and survive, badly injured. My depth perception and distance estimation is awful. And I am paralytically afraid of jumping from
heights—cliff-jumping with cousins from several feet above water
was enough to freak me out.
In the seven years following my first suicide attempt I moved
apartments once, changed jobs twice and tried to end my life at least
half a dozen times, depending what you count as a discrete attempt.
Each suicide attempt made me more reluctant to try again not because
I didn’t want to die but because I couldn’t stand the emotional letdown of thinking it was all finally over only to realize it wasn’t.
I started wondering whether I really wanted to die badly enough,
or whether I just kept punking myself. But the desire didn’t dissipate.

7
Know Thine Enemy
I procrastinate the hell out of everything imaginable. So maybe it’s
no surprise I let my grandmother’s exhortations to write a book
percolate for years without doing much about it. But I found myself
continually, repeatedly, compulsively pulling out a notebook or
opening a Word document and scrawling misery a few words and
snatches at a time, often from bed when I was unable to sleep or
unable to emerge. I began to read everything about depression and
suicide that I could lay my hands on and it wasn’t enough: THere
was a gap in the discourse between redemptive narratives and antipsychiatry polemics and academic screeds. And I found that my
experience, and that of many others, falls into that wide gap.
So I started making calls—just tentatively, because I had no idea
what I was doing, and because I had (and was desperately clinging
to) a day job. But I couldn’t not: Surely someone could shed light on
this despair that buried me.
I reached out to Madhukar Trivedi, the founding director of the
Center for Depression Research and Clinical Care at the University
of Texas Southwestern. He’s in the midst of a decade-long study of
two thousand depressed people, tracking numerous clinical, biological, sociodemographic variables and outcomes, and he helped walk
me through how the disease first hits you. “Half the people who get
depressed will get their first episode before the age of thirty,” he tells

Know Thine Enemy

51

me on the phone. 1 “They have a whole lifetime of suffering.” He’d be
the first to also tell you there is treatment out there now, and hope
for better treatment soon—misery isn’t a given. But that’s a chilling
thing to hear.
There is something perniciously unfair about a disease that
strikes, as this one tends to, in early adulthood, just when you’re
supposed to be coming into yourself as a human being. You’re poised
within a world of opportunity—charging forward, flooded with
plans and ideas and ambition—only to be trapped without warning
in endless dark. That sense of purpose flickers back every now and
then, only to be drowned out. I can’t. I can’t. It shafts your budding
life partnerships, your education, your career.
Major depressive disorder starts, ostensibly, when clusters of
symptoms cause serious, protracted impairment. How serious, how
protracted does that impairment have to be for you to qualify as
depressed? There’s no surefire way to tell. It’s easier to spot depression in its most awful extreme; far trickier to diagnose a much
milder case.
“We dichotomize gradients.” 2 Back in Toronto, where I live, Paul
Kurdyak, a psychiatrist and the medical director of performance
improvement at the Center for Addiction and Mental Health
(CAMH, familiarly known to locals as cam-aitch) has invited me
to his office in an old brown brick building close to the bustling
streets of College and Spadina. The noise of the traffic and the
late afternoon sunlight filters in through a west-facing window. A
friendly man with dark brown hair who readily warms to his
topic—I kept him talking in his office for hours and made him late,
slightly, for a dinner—he balances clinical and research work and
somehow manages to be insanely prolific and still piss off his own
colleagues, as he did when he suggested there was little need for
more psychiatrists—but a huge need for better care. I was drawn
to his work on the burden of mental illness and showing the ways
our system falls down on itself and fails its users, who if they’re
lucky wind up right back where they started.

52

Anna Mehler Paperny

“We have to draw a line somewhere,” he says, “’cause that’s just
how clinical stuff works. We want to know if someone’s depressed
or not depressed, so we create this threshold.” The worse your depression is, the more obvious it is you have it and the more effective the
treatments tend to be. “There’s a point at which antidepressants seem
to have the biggest bang for their buck, relative to placebo, and it
happens to be at the more severe end.”
People in the fuzzy twilight between a mood disorder and a
crappy mood state could be forgiven for thinking the whole thing’s
a sham. They may not have an illness and if they do, available treatments are unlikely to help as much as they might were their illness
more severe. When detractors decry antidepressants as little better
than placebo, this is the patient population they’re talking about.
Who makes that call, dichotomizes that gradient? Usually the
gatekeeper to care is your family doctor. I went to talk to Javed Alloo,
a family doctor I reached through CAMH in my attempts to get a
sense of what it’s like dealing daily with mental illness and mentally
ill patients as a nonspecialist, a general practitioner. He is one of the
few family doctors who seeks out patients with often complex mental
illness rather than the reverse. Speaking in a North Toronto food
court over the din of lunch-hour rush, and the melting gelato my
questions prevented him from finishing, he explains how he deals
with mental illness and how he demarcates between serious psychopathology and mild mental angst. The key is function and duration,
he says: How long does the shittiness last, and to what degree does
it stop you from doing the things you have to do to live and to make
life worth living?
“If they’re coming in to see me once every two weeks for fifteen
minutes, and this is the worst expression of the anxiety in their
life, their family’s not complaining to them, it isn’t stopping them
from going out and doing stuff . . . then they don’t need treatment.
Obviously, it’s not black and white. It’s a spectrum. But the question is, At what point does it become dysfunctional?” 3
∙∙∙

Know Thine Enemy

53

Is depr ession a new thing? An old thing? Is it becoming more
prevalent, or are we just diagnosing it more readily? I discovered that
while the more colorful and memorable depictions of mental illness
tend to involve mania and psychosis, the Bible, Arab medicine, Greek
mythology, and centuries of European spiritual and pseudoscientific
record-keeping all make reference to enduring despair beyond any
external trigger. First-century physician Ishaq ibn Imran called melancholy “that feeling of dejection and isolation which forms in the
soul because of something which the patients think is real but which
is in fact unreal.” 4
There’s a real and widespread and understandable impression that
depression is everywhere and increasing. In The Noonday Demon,
the early twenty-first-century’s seminal, masterfully written book
on depression, Andrew Solomon describes the disorder as a malady
profoundly exacerbated by modernity. Like skin cancer, he writes,
“depression is a bodily affliction that has escalated in recent times
for fairly specific reasons.” Where a depleted ozone layer and carcinogenic soup have made skin cancer a much more common scourge,
the strain of modernity—“the pace of life, the technological chaos
of it, the alienation of people from one another, the breakdown of
traditional family structures, the loneliness that is endemic, the failure of systems of belief”—has driven a growing number of people
to depression.5
All these things affect us in as yet unknown ways, some of them
bewilderingly new. But crippling despair divorced from reality, by
whichever nomer you choose, has been associated with the stress
of modernity for millennia. As far back as Aristotle, sociologist
Andrew Scull writes, melancholia was associated with “outstanding accomplishment”; in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
“melancholia became something of a fashionable disorder among
the cultivated classes, an affliction to which it appeared that the
scholar and the man of genius were particularly prone.” A century
later, “nervous illness” became a marker of a civilized, refined individual or society, to which more supposedly primitive populations,

54

Anna Mehler Paperny

busy with hunting and laboring and free of artifice and stress and
the pursuit of excellence, were thought to be immune.6 All of these
are relatives of modern-day mood disorders. All have existed for
millennia. All have been associated with modernity, to various
degrees, since the concept of modernity existed. So that’s not new.
There’s no shortage of literature decrying a ballooning epidemic
of mental illness and depression. But population studies indicate
depression’s prevalence is pretty steady, although its level varies.
According to America’s preeminent institution for mental health
research, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), at any
given moment about 7 percent of the American population has
depression,7 which is about what depression’s prevalence was when
the National Comorbidity Survey was conducted in the early 1990s;8
increasing use of antidepressants doesn’t necessarily indicate an
increase in the prevalence of depression or even its diagnosis.9 World
Health Organization statistics estimate prevalence at just under
5 percent globally—a number whose increase over time is in keeping with population growth and the growth in the number of older
adults who are more likely to report prevalence.10 Lifetime prevalence is closer to 17 percent, which means that almost one in five
people will be plunged into despondent despair at some point in
their lives.
The toll is high. The World Health Organization multiplied diseases’ prevalence by the degree to which they wreck you and found
depression to be the single largest contributor to disability in the
world, swallowing up fifty million Years Lived with Disability
(YLD) in 2015 alone.11
Suicide kills about eight hundred thousand people a year globally but if you’re being brutalized by depression, suicide isn’t the only
thing you’re at higher risk of dying from. “Let’s talk about heart disease. Let’s talk about diabetes. Depression increases your risk of
dying after you’ve survived a heart attack,” Sarah Lisanby, head of
translational research at NIMH in Maryland, says to me in one of
multiple conversations we had as I fumbled my way through the field,

Know Thine Enemy

55

and she was very understanding of my ignorance. Her job, largely,
is to help translate esoteric, pie-in-the-sky cutting-edge research
into new tools or insights that can be used in a doctor’s, counselor’s,
or nurse’s office. Depression, she says, “worsens not only your
mental health, but also your physical health. And so even though
neuropsychiatric disorders are the leading cause of disability, and
this has been recognized, they’re also the leading drivers of other
causes of disability. . . . The impact of depression on your health
goes beyond your brain.” 12
So why don’t we take this illness more seriously? In part, perhaps, because depression, as a concept, has become a victim of its
own success.
While pathological despair is hardly new, “depression” as a
mood disorder really emerged in the middle decades of the twentieth century, as psychiatry sought to cast off both its asylum
baggage and its pseudoscientific reputation: Psychiatrists were to
be considered “real” doctors, treating relatively “normal” people—
not confined inside mental hospitals but walking around in the
world. By 1980 depression went from being a word primarily associated with economic downturn to a disorder warranting an entry
in that doorstopper of a mental illness dictionary, the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, and became one of the
most prevalent mental illnesses in the public discourse. Throughout
the ’70s and ’80s, “popular magazine readers were increasingly told
that depression was something that could affect them—and that
rising rates of depression were a serious national problem,” writes
the psychiatrist and historian Laura Hirshbein (full dis­closure:
She’s my cousin). Major depressive disorder was on the vanguard
of illness as “consumer product”—something you could shop and
self-improve your way out of. This persistent repetition in mainstream media made depression seem a common treatable condition but also made depression a word used colloquially to describe
a general feeling of malaise.13 This meant that having depression,
the diagnosed illness, became easy to discount and easy to

56

Anna Mehler Paperny

conflate with a ubiquitous human emotion that’s unpleasant but
hardly pathological.
That’s one reason so many people fail to see depression for a real,
diagnosed illness and instead see it as part of the normal spectrum
of human emotion, creating a disorder where there is none, turning
sick people into needy malingerers and those purporting to treat them
into conniving charlatans. You can’t do a lab test for depression—at
least not yet—you just sniff out its presence based on squishily subjective variables. That makes it easier to discount but no less real or
debilitating.

8
Checking Boxes
For millennia, we’ve recognized the difference between “normal”
sadness and crippling despair. But we’ve never been good at delineating between the two. So the American Psychiatric Association’s
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) defines depression by a
list of symptoms rather than how it’s caused. Zeroing in on the
causes could have revolutionized our understanding and approach
to depression, but we didn’t because we’ve never known them. So
you wind up with a morbid menu.1 Do you feel “depressed” or irritable almost all the time, almost every day? Are you less interested
in stuff you used to like? Have you gained or lost at least 5 percent
of your body mass? Are you sleeping way less or way more? Are you
way more active than usual or not active at all? Do you have no
energy? Do you feel guilty or worthless? Are you having trouble
concentrating? Do you want to kill yourself?
Officially, medically, if any insurer is going to pay for your drugs
and your psychotherapy, you need to check off at least five of those
nine boxes—and confirm that the symptoms in those boxes cause
you “clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.”
First of all, the above violates what I would consider Nosology
Rule Number One: Don’t define something using the term you’re
defining. I have depression if I’ve been feeling “depressed” every

58

Anna Mehler Paperny

day? Rookie tautological mistake, American Psychiatric Association.
Reading these criteria after my own diagnosis made me feel like
a flounder—flattened, two-dimensional, bottom-feeding. They
could apply to anyone and no one, I thought. You could have two
people presenting almost entirely divergent symptoms and diagnose them with the same illness. Sometimes you successfully treat
depression only to discover the things you considered symptoms
are actually separate illnesses that persist on their own.
Anxiety, for example, can be either a symptom of depression or
another illness altogether. The two frequently coexist. One distinguishing factor I learned while navigating my own neuroses is the
nature of the worry: People with anxiety disorder tend to freak out
about the future—what they want to do, what they’re going to do,
the infinite ways they could conceivably screw it up. If you’re
depressed, there isn’t much of a future to worry about. People with
depression-flavored anxiety suffer crippling worry about the past,
not despite our inability to change it but because of that. We ruminate endlessly about shit we did this morning or yesterday or last
week or last year and how unforgivable it was and how everyone
judged and continues to judge us and maybe we should ask them
about it or no that would make it worse and what are all the possible
ways they could have been upset about it and who are all the people
they probably told? Angsty, ruminating moose.
The checklist is also incredibly reductive. The DSM’s authors
boil down diagnosis of mental illness to something resembling an
online quiz: Which Disney Princess Mental Disorder Are You?
Online questionnaires like these do exist, with varying imprimaturs of medical legitimacy. You click through, answering questions
about your levels of stress, anxiety, enervation, restlessness, appetite, mood. You’re asked about your desire to die and when you click
“hells, yes,” a dialogue box pops up with a crisis line to call. I’ve
clicked through a couple of those quizzes, both largely based on the
kinds of questionnaires used to diagnose people in a clinical setting,
both giving me that two-dimensional flounder feeling as I wondered

Checking Boxes

59

what small changes to my answers I could make to get a different
verdict.
Benoit Mulsant wants to see more of those quizzes. I’d sought
him out at CAMH where he’s clinician scientist, and among other
things he’s working on a way to diagnose and, hopefully, treat people
in remote areas without access to psychiatric care. This matters: So
much of mental health care is concentrated in big cities that it can
be impossible for many people to access even a basic assessment that
would allow you to figure out what care you need and whom you
need it from. Crisis becomes the default. He likens his initiative to
a “concierge” for mental health care: Train someone to put patients
through a standardized, symptom-based screening protocol
designed to determine the severity of their illness, the kind of care
they need, and then refer them to whomever’s best and most accessibly positioned to provide that care. You don’t actually diagnose
and you don’t need to be a physician or a nurse. You can administer
the screening over the phone or online, so lack of physical access to
a specialist doesn’t preclude you from at least figuring out whoever’s
most likely to be able to help you, and then contacting that person
directly to set something up.2
This “concierge” isn’t widely available yet. For now, most formal
diagnoses are still based on in-person interviews criticized by turns
as too formulaic or too subjective. In his (fascinating) 2015 tome
dedicated to a history of our conceptualization of mental illness,
Madness in Civilization, Andrew Scull dismisses modern psychiatry’s
diagnostic methodology as “a ‘tick the boxes’ approach to diagnosis”
that “eliminate[s] so far as is possible individual clinical judgment”
and promotes “rapid, routine and replicable labelling.” 3 But at the
same time, I find, the DSM diagnoses rely overwhelmingly on a
patient’s ability to self-report and a physician’s ability to recognize
and identify nebulous characteristics that aren’t nearly as easily categorized as the DSM would suggest. It doesn’t help that people
suffering from psychiatric illnesses often lack insight into their diseases as a result of the disease itself. As a doctor you need to assess

60

Anna Mehler Paperny

a patient’s mental state and read the bullshit between the lines. I don’t
doubt most clinicians have become adept at ferreting out the sick
from the sad, malingerers from those trying to hide a more serious
malaise. But a measure so subject to interpretation leaves a lotta room
for error: When a doctor asks you if you’ve been feeling down, if
you’ve lost interest in your daily activities, your definition of feeling
down might differ from theirs. When a doctor asks if you’ve thought
about killing yourself at all in the past two weeks, and you hesitate
before saying no, how the doctor deals with that can change your
diagnosis and course of treatment or lack thereof.
Given that this checklist definition was designed explicitly to
avoid that awkward moment when two clinicians, ostensible experts
in the same medical field, come to two different conclusions, it’s
ironic that it continues to happen.
I learned this firsthand when I found out after the fact that I’d
been diagnosed with two different illnesses by two psychiatrists at
the same institution within days of each other, and came close to
being discharged immediately without any plan of care and without
even being told what my diagnosis was.
The first psychiatrist who evaluated me—the one who earned my
family’s eternal dislike when she suggested we were all alcoholics—
diagnosed me with borderline personality disorder. It’s a diagnosis
associated with impulsivity, emotional instability, and interpersonal
problems that include anything from a lack of empathy to emotional
manipulation or separation anxiety. It’s also characterized by almost
dissociative self-harm, where you might surface afterward to wonder,
“What just happened?” It’s the kind of diagnosis that’s easy enough
to make, but has a much tougher time holding up to rigorous scrutiny. Knowing what I know now, I can understand why she’d slot
someone who makes a serious suicide attempt and then insists everything’s totally OK into that category.
And I get why that diagnosis was wrong. Problems I developed
in relating to people, I learned all too well, came from the social withdrawal that’s a common symptom of depression and turned me into

Checking Boxes

61

an ornery unwilling hermit. My mercurial, erratic-seeming disposition came from the dizzying swing whenever my Super-FunctionalHappy-Not-Depressed! coping-mechanism facade short-circuited to
let my genuine unpalatable misery show through.
I didn’t have a personality disorder; I was just desperately trying
to swallow a disease that kept clawing its way to the surface.
I’m exceptionally lucky I got that second opinion, even though it
meant those awful extra two weeks locked up, and lucky that the
second opinion, the diagnosis of major depressive disorder, prevailed. Other people I’ve spoken with have been handed a multitude
of divergent diagnoses and endured years or months of ineffectual
treatment with unpleasant side effects before they and their doctors
hit on something that worked. One acquaintance was told she had
depression, then post-traumatic stress disorder plus anxiety. Decades
later, after she’d constructed an identity for herself and spoke regularly on public forums about what it’s like to battle mental illness,
she was diagnosed with a personality disorder and the new, scarysounding label sent her spiraling. The two of us pored over a binder
of symptoms in an otherwise empty Japanese restaurant, by turns
rationalizing, dismissing, making light of the label.
Chronic illness changes the way you see yourself—it outlasts
jobs, homes, relationships. Even the flimsiest reification has power.

Elliot Goldner, for mer director of Simon Fraser University’s
Center for Applied Research in Mental Health & Addiction, started
his career helping individuals struggling with mental illnesses and
addiction in Vancouver’s notorious Downtown Eastside. I was lucky
enough to speak with him before his death in 2016. He told me over
the phone that depression is perhaps better characterized as a bunch
of different illnesses with sometimes similar symptoms: Some people
do get sick as a result of trauma—such external shocks as abuse, war,
loss, and sundered relationships, financial or professional disaster.
Others don’t have that tangible experiential trigger.4

62

Anna Mehler Paperny

That kind, my kind, the depression without an experiential trigger, is the kind we understand the least and that tends to be most
resistant to treatment. It could be immunological; it could be parasitic; it could be genetic or epigenetic—or some weird combination
of all or none of the above. Some prominent physicians have suggested depression results from unbalanced gastrointestinal microflora or a severe allergic reaction, or the common parasite Toxoplasma
gondii—better known as the crazy cat lady parasite. (Sadly there’s
no evidence so far in favor of mood-stabilizing fecal transplants or
antidepressant parasite exorcisms.)
Such subjectivity around diagnoses offers little comfort to
anyone skeptical of the field’s medical pedigree. And the critiques
don’t come from antipsychiatry activists alone: Each update to the
DSM unfolds like a backstabbing melodrama for geeky doctors, as
titans of psychiatry denounce each other’s approach to the foundation of diagnoses for the brainsick. Allen Frances, who coauthored
the third edition back in the ’80s, slammed the later versions as
sloppy, secretive, and potentially pathologizing normal behavior
such as grief.5 Even the most prominent members of the psychiatric
establishment have expressed skepticism bordering on blasphemy.
“There’s no reality” in the DSM’s diagnoses, then NIMH director
Thomas Insel said shortly before the DSM-5 came out in 2013.
“These are just constructs. . . . We might have to stop using terms
like depression or schizophrenia, because they are getting in our
way, confusing things.” 6
The DSM has loomed large in the public and medical imagination, as a kind of bible and infallible conferrer of identity. But it’s
more useful, Thomas Insel advised me, to treat it as a dictionary
rather than an encyclopedia.7 This makes sense, but perhaps it’s best
to treat it as no more authoritative than its name suggests—a manual
of diagnoses, a role it often plays now. It’s possible, as much as
psychiatry’s categorizing authorities might hate to admit it, that our
diagnostic designations are arbitrary enough to be unnecessary.
Does it really matter if our best definitions of depression and other

Checking Boxes

63

mood disorders are so nebulous as to lack meaning, as long as we
can identify the people who need treatment and get them treatment that will alleviate suffering, make life worth living, without
causing harm?
Maybe not. But, as I found out, we’re pretty bad at treatment, too.
Especially when it comes to the most fatal psychiatric phenomenon
we’re up against.

9
Suicide Blues
I never know what to say when people ask whether I’ve been thinking of killing myself “lately.” Have you blinked lately? Longings
for death are fleeting mosquitos that swarm—“Why am I alive?”
“I want to die.” “I should be dead”—dozens of times a day. They’re
compulsive obsessions, methods brainstormed at least once or twice
daily, detailed plans hatched at least once a week. They’re grisly
nightly visions of accidents or homicides.
Suicidal ideations materialize like sexual fantasies: vivid, unbidden, distracting. Like a desiccating thirst pulling thoughts away
from all else. The same anticipated relief. The same agony when that
release proves out of reach. Blue balls, but for death.
I pictured in detail my bodily decomposition. What would go
first? Would I stay fresh longer if I left the air conditioning on high?
How long before the smell seeped into the apartment hallway, or
through ventilation shafts into other apartments? My poor neighbors. I should send them flowers. I had an overwhelming desire to
turn in my body and donate it wholesale. “I have so many organs!”
I’d declare to anyone who’d listen, mutter to myself several times a
day. This is just weird enough to sound like a sick joke to another
human being but for me it never was: I was gobsmacked by my own
wasteful monopoly on body parts. Dozens of people die every day
awaiting organs, and here I was hogging so many of them—perfectly

Suicide Blues

65

good pancreas, lungs, liver, kidneys that could save the lives of people
who could then go on to win Nobel Prizes or solve refugee crises.
That aspiration ran so deep, I felt cheated to discover you can only
donate organs if you die while stabilized, on a ventilator—not if
you’re dead on arrival at a hospital. (If that fact doesn’t sound devastating to you, you clearly don’t dream up suicides designed so that
no one will find you for at least thirty hours.)
Everything presents a path to death. I was disappointed to find
nothing weight-bearing in my apartment to which I could fasten a
ligature, but that didn’t stop me from looping a stiffly knotted noose
lengthwise around my door and trying to strangle myself with it.
I peered over every ledge I got near and feverishly researched the
toxicity and overdose potential of every drug I was prescribed.
When surgeons prescribed me Percocet in the wake of successive
knee surgeries in 2017—meniscal arthroscopy followed four months
later by a full-on ACL repair—all I could think of was the possibility of overdose. I said nothing when my first surgeon inadvertently
wrote the same prescription twice: once before the procedure, and
once afterward. The sixty 325-milligram pills I got each time felt like
a precious gift, a personal hand grenade. I cursed my own weakness
when I caved and took them one by one for actual post-surgery
pain—wasting this precious resource on myself for no good reason.
But being swallowed by suicidality doesn’t make all my actions
actively self-destructive. I’m a hyper-defensive cyclist and do everything I can not to become roadkill, notwithstanding fantasies of
being hit, dragged, pulled beneath a truck’s undercarriage and
crushed. I can’t think of subways and streetcars without imagining
throwing myself in front of one but my metro horror has me flattened
against the wall in subway stations, as far from the tracks as I can get.
Every time I told my psychiatrist I’d come close to self-obliteration
he’d ask, “What stopped you?” At first this sounded like a taunt: Why
don’t you kill yourself, already? If this were such a compelling obsession, why did I keep pussyfooting around it? His intent was not to
goad me to suicide but to make me verbalize reasons for not dying.

66

Anna Mehler Paperny

Even once I’d recognized this, I still felt again and again like I was
coming up short: I didn’t feel I had a good enough reason for not
having killed myself. I chickened out; I was tired; I didn’t want to die
in a messy apartment and didn’t have the energy to clean it; I was
scared of fucking up; I was scared of being found too soon. Other
times, this line of questioning proved more illuminating: THere were
still questions I wanted to ask, things I wanted to do. Even half-assed
senses of obligation—to work, to family, to someone I’d made plans
to see—sometimes tipped the balance in favor of stasis over suicide.
It’s something I still ask myself accusatorily—What is wrong with
you? Why haven’t you killed yourself already?—but trying to elucidate good reasons for not being dead, writing them down for future
reference, can be lifesaving.
Suicidality and curiosity are anathema to each other: You can’t
want to know things if you want to die. As long as I had questions
I had reason to live, and when I was overwhelmed by a desire for
death I could not begin to do the curious work that made life worth
living. Unable then to conceive of an existence without suicidality,
death is the best imaginable outcome.
On good days I could convince myself that I was no less worthy
of life than any other organism. But even if I can convince myself
that, objectively speaking, I have about as much justification in being
alive as a blackfly, my brain flits to a much less easily dismissible
fixation: What if I just don’t want to be alive? What if I just don’t like
it? What if I’m just tired? And no matter how much psychotherapy
you practice, that’s tough to logic your way out of.
Pre-suicide priorities are nonsensical. I was most inclined to kill
myself at times when I was confident no one would notice I was gone
for a few days at least. Perhaps it’s a testament to my sense of urgent
desperation that, paradoxically, my most serious attempts were at
inopportune moments—when I was supposed to be at work or had
upcoming appointments. Even then, I convinced myself I had to at
least make an effort to clean the apartment. More than once, this
weird standard helped me put off an attempt because I lacked the

Suicide Blues

67

energy to empty the garbage or clean the bathroom. A couple of times
I made a point of buying nonperishable snacks and hard liquor for
whoever I thought would have the shitty task of cleaning out my
apartment after my death.
What does one wear to one’s self-orchestrated death? Jeans, probably. And a T-shirt, but a clean one with no holes. A bra? If weeks- or
months-old nail polish is chipping, do you peel it off or repaint it or
does it not matter? Does comfort outweigh presentability, or is that
dumb given that you’re going to be beyond caring soon and this is
the last impression loved ones will have of you? Showering and toothbrushing is nonnegotiable, obviously. Floss and deodorant, less so.
But should you make sure your hair dries well before you plan to go
horizontal, lest you die with flattened curls hugging your scalp? What
about moisturizing lotion for soon-to-be-dead dry skin?
You’d think, amid all this obsession, all these fevered compulsive
plans, I’d leave room for a little consideration for the people I love, the
people I harm through my self-destructive actions. Families, familial
obligations, can be protective factors: For weeks one spring the only
thing stopping me from killing myself was the fear it would ruin my
brother’s pending wedding. So why isn’t this a deterrent all the time?
The answer’s unflattering. I do think of my family and of the friends
who count as family. I wish them joy and know I bring them profound
concern. I hate myself for causing pain to the people I care about most,
people who have the shitty luck of being close to me. But the guilt that
engenders isn’t enough to dispel suicidal ideation.
Sometimes because, as hideous as this sounds to say, being loved
is a necessary prerequisite for wanting to live but it is not sufficient
on its own. And sometimes guilt at what I do to my family foments
my desire to die: I feel like a septic limb that must be cut off lest it
kill the whole organism. A painful excision, but a necessary one.
You won’t believe me but procrastination’s the best suicide-­
prevention measure out there. If all else fails, if drugs and psychotherapy and thought-record deconstructions all fall short and hope
remains unreachable, the knowledge that you can still kill yourself

68

Anna Mehler Paperny

tomorrow or next week or next month remains, perversely, the surest
way to ensure you don’t kill yourself right this second. In that same
vein, the notion you’ve squandered all your chances, reduced everything to shit and will never have another shot at fixing your fuckups
or escaping the shame they elicit, makes suicide seem a much more
immediate imperative.
“People, they go back and forth between ‘I don’t know if I’m
going to do this today; maybe next week.’ But sometimes they’re
reassured that they have a solution, even though most of us rationally would say that’s not a good solution,” Jane Pearson, head of
Adult Preventive Intervention and chair of the Suicide Research
Consortium at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH),
says to me. She was kind and helpful and followed up our phone
conversation with a long email full of resources to check out and
additional people to bug. She focuses on the catching-you-beforeyou-fall field of medicine: She studies how to stop suicides before
they happen, whether from the emergency room or the community.
“If you’re collaborating and really trying to help somebody, you have
to acknowledge that this is a solution they’ve come up with. And
you can always say, ‘I don’t agree with that, but you got it. . . . In the
meantime, let’s see if we can generate other ideas. And help you find
a life worth living.’” 1
For fuck’s sake, put it off. Postpone till tomorrow the self-­
obliteration you long for today.
It’s excruciating to have someone you adore, someone whose
suffering you loathe yourself for increasing, ask you to promise
never to do the thing you spend 80 percent of your waking life thinking about. You say, “Promise me you’ll never try again,” and I, no
matter how much I love you and want you to be happy and fulfilled
and pain-free, think, But what if I have to?
The impulse to live and keep on living is one of the most basic of
any organism. Self-extermination requires a force of will strong
enough to override everything your body has evolved to do: survive.
Vomiting, gag reflexes, pain thresholds, the need to keep breathing,

Suicide Blues

69

a fear of heights, or a thundering oncoming train—these all kick in
involuntarily, bits of your nervous system at war with each other.
There are also cultural and legal taboos that keep people from killing themselves. Most religions aren’t cool with doing yourself in and
sometimes hell can be an effective—albeit crappy, if you’re suffering
from self-blame already—deterrent. Attempting suicide was a crime
in the UK until 1961;2 in Canada, until 1972.3 As recently as 2014,
trying to kill yourself in India could’ve put you behind bars for a
year, although, like most penal sentences, that doesn’t appear to have
been much of a deterrent: India’s suicide rate grew from 10.9 per
100,000 in 2009 to 11.4 in 2013—an additional seven thousand people
a year.4
What drives a person to that point?
There are countless factors at play but few are as esoteric as
Hamlet’s existential “To be or not to be.” (Hamlet didn’t off himself:
Ophelia did.) The vast majority of suicides have one common element, and it isn’t a detached intellectual conclusion as to the nature
of being. Mental illness features prominently in 90 percent of cases
for which coroners, medical examiners, or forensic psychologists can
determine a motive.5 Regardless who you are or how you do it, if you
kill yourself—or make an earnest effort to that effect—chances are
compassionate, evidence-based care would have alleviated the awfulness you’re dying to escape.

Depr ession’s the most common mental illness giving rise to
suicidal ideation but it’s hardly the only one. There is a compelling argument for classifying suicidality as a distinct pathology—
a disorder in its own right, rather than a symptom of something
else. Maria Oquendo, past president of the American Psychiatric
Association and the chair of psychiatry at the University of
Pennsylvania’s Perelman School of Medicine, has been lobbying
for suicidality to have a section of its own in the next iteration of
that thornily authoritative conferrer of legitimacy, the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual.

70

Anna Mehler Paperny

“Not everybody who is suicidal is depressed. And not everybody
who is depressed is suicidal. But they’re frequently comorbid pathologies.” They’re illnesses that go hand in hand, she tells me over the
phone.6 (I certainly see both in my own predicament.) Separating
suicidality into its own category would, ideally, encourage the use
of suicide-specific interventions or at least make it harder to ignore
in the hope that by treating the mood disorder the desire to die
will evaporate.
So if someone talks about feeling persistently down, for example, but mentions as they’re leaving the doctor’s office that they’re
thinking of killing themselves, having a separate diagnostic code
for such suicidal ideation can remind the doctor to tackle it on its
own. That would also make suicidal ideation in a patient or in the
population easier to track: It would show up in the emergency room,
for example, or in the coroner’s office; it would make it easier for
researchers to study the desire to die, to get a sense of how prevalent it is, where and among what populations.
Physicians and epidemiologists have been trying to uncover
suicide risk factors: characteristics outside existing disorders that
make people more likely to try to kill themselves. Hopelessness;
an “over-general” memory that skips over specific details; hyperperfectionism; trouble solving problems; and a tendency toward
black-and-white or all-or-nothing thinking are among them.
Hopelessness certainly resonates for me: Beyond sadness, selfloathing, or any other negative emotional state, an absence of hope
can be the most decisive thing propelling me to seek death. The
shittier things get, the more the claustrophobic horizons of your
world close in. There’s no room for hope because there’s no room
for anything. So I confess it was news to me that not everyone with
depression feels hopeless.
“Depressed people who still have hope tend not to become suicidal,” says Tom Ellis, who when I spoke with him was the senior
staff psychologist at the Houston-based Menninger Clinic and has
been researching the differences between suicidal and non-suicidal

Suicide Blues

71

mentally disordered people. “They come in and say, ‘I’m going
through a terrible patch. I’m hopeful, if I get treatment, I’ll get
better.’ . . . I would say the mere act of getting treatment means you
have some hope.” 7 (I agree and I disagree here. It’s possible for me
to have enough hope to take my meds but not enough not to try to
kill myself.) A degree of psychological f lexibility—the ability
to notice your thoughts and feelings with a degree of circumspection, so they’re of you but they’re not you—can also be a protective
factor against suicide. “So if I have a thought like, ‘I’m no good,’ I’m
able to step back and say, ‘That was just a thought that came up. It’s
not necessarily a fact . . . nor is it necessarily going to be helpful, nor
should I base my decisions, such as life or death, on the basis of
a thought that comes up.”
If eight hundred thousand people around the world kill themselves every year,8 that means about twenty-two hundred a day, or
three every two minutes. Statistically, two dozen people killed
themselves in the time it took you to get out of bed, showered and
caffeinated. Maybe forty-five during your commute to work; another
ninety in the time you spent making dinner. Unless you, like me,
take an eternity to do any of those things, if they happen at all. In
which case, think of it this way: Every time you mull killing yourself and manage to talk yourself down because you have more to do
and more to ask of life, a handful of people have lost that internal
wrenching wrestling match and ended it.
In Canada, where eleven people kill themselves daily,9 you’re
almost ten times more likely to kill yourself than you are to be killed
by someone else.10 About 120 Americans kill themselves every day.
Victims of America’s gun epidemic are overwhelmingly suicides:
Americans are more than twice as likely to die by their own hands
as someone else’s and almost twice as likely to shoot themselves to
death than be shot to death by someone else.11 If you die young,
suicide’s much more likely to be the cause: In 2016 it was the second-­
leading cause of death for Americans between ten and thirty-four
years old.12

72

Anna Mehler Paperny

The vast majority of people who kill themselves are men—not
because they’re more likely to be depressed or suicidal but because
they’re more likely to choose lethal methods like guns. (Studies have
found women actually make up the majority of people seen in the
ER following suicide attempts.) Many, many more people try to kill
themselves than actually do it—about half a million Americans are
brought to emergency rooms every year after having tried to end
their lives.13
Epidemiologists are leery of putting too much weight on sharp
changes over short periods but America’s spike in suicide appears
too big to be a blip. The rate of people killing themselves in one of
the most prosperous countries in the world jumped 33 percent in
eighteen years, from 10.5 to 14 per 100,000.14 It rose more for women
than for men, which narrows the gap between the two but still leaves
men four times more likely to kill themselves. The suicide rate among
adolescent girls jumped the most, tripling—tripling—during that
time period. (But keep in mind, the huge rate of change is influenced
by a small denominator: 1.5 per 100,000 up from 0.5.)15
“When [the Centers for Disease Control] released their statistics of this increase between 1999 and 2014, people went, ‘What?’”
NIMH’s Jane Pearson recalls. She just wishes there were more of
that, more of a sustained palpable jolt in the public consciousness.
“There was some recognition that this is a problem. But compared
to other health problems, we don’t have a Susan Komen foundation
[one of the best-funded breast cancer organizations in the US], a
big organization advocating for this.” 16
Her colleague Sarah Lisanby at NIMH—the head of trans­
lational medicine, in charge of morphing research into health
interventions—doesn’t know what’s driving America’s spike in suicides but she hopes the sharp jump will be a call to arms for the
research and clinical communities. “We’re making progress in
terms of our neuroscientific understanding. We can translate that
into public health impacts,” she tells me, pointing to research into
biomarkers and neurocircuitry that can mean new or better-informed

Suicide Blues

73

treatments. “And we need to accelerate that pace of translation because
people are dying.” 17

Even as r ates rise, reality is likely worse: Evidence indicates
we’re undercounting suicides by a significant amount—by as much
as two-thirds, depending how you guesstimate. For one thing,
despite the supposed decrease in shame in having a family member
kill themselves, our persistent societal freak-out regarding suicide
can make both relatives and authorities hesitant to classify deaths
as such. There’s a very high burden of proof required for coroners
(usually in Canada) and medical examiners (in the United States)
to classify a death as a suicide. There’s rarely incontrovertible evidence: Most people don’t leave suicide notes and not everyone talks
about killing themselves before killing themselves. Even if they had
at some point in the past, how do you know this specific incident
was a suicide? If someone is depressed, even suicidal, but also misuses drugs, how do you know for sure whether an overdose is
purposeful? How do you know for sure whether a single-vehicle
crash was careless driving or driven by a need for death? How can
you be certain whether someone slipped or jumped?
You’re more likely to find suicides when you look for them. And,
much of the time, we don’t. “The under-reporting of suicide is a recognized concern in Canada and internationally,” reads a 2016 study
by the Public Health Agency of Canada.18 Suicide deaths are also
examined a lot less closely, on average: About 55 percent of US suicide deaths get autopsied, compared to 92 percent of homicides.19
The more autopsies a county does, the more suicides it identifies,
West Virginia University researcher Ian Rockett has found: If you
spend more time investigating a death you’re more likely to deem it
intentional on the part of the deceased. I reached him by phone after
reading some of his papers: He and his colleagues studied the rate
of suicide classifications by county and found that the more detailed
death certificates are, the more time coroners or medical examiners

74

Anna Mehler Paperny

spend on them, the better-resourced they are to be able to do so, the
greater that county’s rate of deaths classified as suicides.20 Another
study, this one in Austria, found that the higher the autopsy rate,
the higher the suicide rate: THe more deaths you examine closely,
the more of them you’ll find to have been the result of tragic intentional self-harm, not tragic accident.
But we’re doing fewer autopsies in Canada and the States, not
more: THe percent of deaths subject to autopsy in Canada dropped
almost in half between 2000 and 2011—from 9.9 percent to 4.8,
“further subjecting suicides to misclassification,” 21 the Canadian
public health paper reads. In the US, autopsies dropped by more
than 50 percent between 1972 and 2007.22
This has been a known issue for a while. The consequences of
underreporting extend beyond public health nerds who get off on
accuracy. It suggests something is less of a problem than it is and
therefore less deserving of our attention and our dollars. Which is
convenient, given how icky it makes us feel in the first place. Finding
fewer suicides can make it seem like suicide is less of an issue.23
“If you think about it, society hasn’t been that invested in suicide prevention,” Rockett points out. “If you more accurately
­portray the self-injury deaths and say, ‘This is mental health,’
there’s potential for rather more resources to be directed toward
the problem.” 24 Take poisoning, where intent can be particularly
tricky to divine: Poisoning deaths classified as suicides dropped
even as poisoning deaths classified as “undetermined intent” rose.
Studies in both the US25 and Canada 26 have found evidence suggesting it isn’t just that people are making more unintentionally
reckless decisions regarding what they smoke, snort, swallow,
inject—we’re actually misclassifying suicides as accidents. We
know substance use increases your risk of suicide. But if you die
thanks to a lethal amount of the substance you’re misusing, your
death is less likely to be classified as a suicide.27
Canada’s Public Health Agency came to similar conclusions:
Overall suicide rates dropped. Suicide poisoning rates dropped.

Suicide Blues

75

Accidental poisoning deaths rose. Poisoning deaths of undetermined
intent jumped by even more—almost 42 percent. The study estimated as much as 60 percent of suicides in 2011 were mistakenly
labeled deaths of undetermined intent by self-poisoning. (The low
end of that estimate is 15 percent, so take it with a bunch of salt. But
it’s still a double-digit underestimation.)28
Botched suicide attempts also go underreported: Many people
who try to kill themselves either don’t seek medical help or lie about
why they are seeking it. I’ve done both those things. I’d do them
again. As I’ve said, telling anyone you’ve tried to kill yourself, let
alone someone you don’t know, let alone someone who could suspend your right to freedom of movement, gives one enormous
pause. (Not that telling someone you love is any easier.)
But take time to talk to people in the hospital for near-fatal poisonings and it can be telling.
Infuriatingly but perhaps unsurprisingly, undercounting suicides, and therefore minimizing the self-destructive death toll and
its magnitude as a public health issue, is worse for marginalized
populations.
The suicide rate for white Americans in 2016 was almost three
times that of black Americans.29 “It didn’t make a lot of sense to me,”
Rockett says. “I couldn’t think of any other major cause of death
where blacks would have had an advantage.” Fact is that nonwhite
North Americans are less likely than white people to get any kind of
care for their depression, much less care that meets evidence-based
standards. Far fewer black people who’ve killed themselves or may
have killed themselves took antidepressants in the year before their
death than their white counterparts, which, given what we know
about the role mental illness plays in the vast majority of suicides,
suggests black people are less likely than white people to get the
psych treatment they need.30
And then the same marginalization that makes you less likely to
get treatment also makes it less likely your death will be classified
accurately, because lack of documented depression treatment leading

76

Anna Mehler Paperny

up to your death makes coroners more likely to classify your death
as being due to an “injury of undetermined intent.” 31 Which means
we’re underestimating the toll this public health crisis takes on your
community—and, therefore, the degree of need for prevention and
interventions that could be directed toward it. Cascades of compounded marginalization. We probably aren’t underestimating black
suicides by a factor of three, but maybe enough to be significant.
So what do you do with that?
Resources would help. More thorough—or at least more frequent—autopsies would help. Talking to people in ICUs would help.
Lessening the need for absolute certainty in determining intent might
also make classification both easier and more inclusive, albeit with
somewhat broader definitions.
Ian Rockett would like to see a tweak in classification: Instead of
probing the recesses of someone’s psyche at the moment of their death
for a very specific kind of purpose—Was this overdose accidental or
purposely suicidal or a combination of suicidality, self-destructive
fatalism, and a substance disorder?—medical examiners and epidemiologists could instead focus on the fact that the individual in
question died by their own hand.32 He says his preferred term is “drug
self-intoxication.” It combines what’s now disaggregated into either
“accidents” or “suicides” or “undetermined,” excises intent, and
focuses on the fact that the dead person did this. In Rockett’s ideal
world, medical examiners would differentiate between licit and illicit
drugs, tap into prescription drug monitoring systems to get a better
sense of how the individual obtained the drugs that killed them.
He isn’t suggesting eliminating entirely the category of accidental
deaths. But he’d like to reverse the starting hypothesis, so that in order
to rule something an accident you have to find evidence indicating
an accident, rather than simply a lack of evidence indicating specific
intent. Of course “there are deaths that are unintentional: A threeyear-old gets into a cabinet and finds a pesticide.” But “from an
epidemiological standpoint, we want to approach things differently.”
∙∙∙

Suicide Blues

77

One way to get at someone’s intent at the moment of death is the
psychological autopsy—where you trace back in time to get a sense
of what was going through someone’s mind and whether they wanted
to die. At Ian Rockett’s suggestion I called up Los Angeles forensic
psychologist Michael Peck, who compares his psychological autopsies to background checks: “You interview people who knew the
deceased. You find out what their life was like, what their last two
weeks were like, who they talked to, what they did, what they didn’t
do. And you examine the details of the death method.” 33 Some methods of death make it easier to suss out intent than others: A gun to
the head is obvious; a gun to the chest is a little more complicated—
could have been a cleaning accident. An overdose can be even
tougher to suss out, depending what the person took and how much
of it and whether this was something they had been prescribed for a
legitimate purpose. If a person swims too far out and drowns, determining intent could rest on their swimming abilities, their mood or
emotions leading up to death. Peck classifies some things as “subintentional suicides”—a single-person car crash, for example. “Even
hanging deaths have been equivocal,” he says. It could have been
autoerotic asphyxiation gone awry. “The main way to get the intent
is to interview the survivors of the deceased. It could be schoolteachers, it could be family members, it could be workplace friends. And try
to get a picture of the last week or two, what was going on with them.”
Even an unclear picture, a lack of contact with other people in
the days or weeks before death, can itself be telling. “Most people
tend to be surprised by the suicide. But as they’re talking to someone
like myself about it later on, it turns out they had more information
than they knew they had. They saw things but never put it together.”
I’ve heard these kinds of rearview mirror insights from the loved
ones of a suicide victim and they are heartbreaking.
Peck tells me he gets a fair bit of pushback from people, especially those closest to the deceased, who often refuse to believe their
loved one ended their own life. And there’s more pushback if the
person’s young. “They usually say, ‘Oh no, it couldn’t be suicide. It’s

78

Anna Mehler Paperny

impossible.’ . . . Our job would not be to convince them. Our job
would be to give them information.”
Sometimes there are psychiatric diagnoses in a person’s past. But
he won’t fill in the blanks if there aren’t—he doesn’t try to diagnose
the person postmortem. But he’s unwound enough suicides after the
fact to get a good sense of the most common precursors: social withdrawal and increased substance consumption—usually alcohol.
Michael Peck harks back to the halcyon days, decades ago,
when there was the will to put time and money into proper psychological autopsies by trained professionals. Since then, he’s seen
policy-makers’ interest in suicide and such labor-intensive postmortem investigations come and go like loud music and big hair.
“It costs money. So there has to be somebody willing to pay for it.”
In the meantime there’s the pressing question: What do you do
while the suicidal person is still alive?

10
Getting in Trouble
It took almost four years before I got myself in trouble again. Spring
of 2015. I was twenty-eight.
This is how it begins: Can’t wake up. Can’t get out of bed. Can’t escape
my personal infinite void. Can’t shake off the oppressive weight that
beggars verbalizing. I spend most of the day (Thursday) in a semi-­
conscious haze and by the time I get vertical I am convinced: I have to
die. I can’t countenance the prospect of more days like this, lost to uselessness and sweaty bedsheets.

There were window cleaners on my side of the building that day,
and their presence added abstractly to my shame at the unmade bed,
the papers scattered everywhere, the dishes lurking in the sink: I
never draw my blinds, figuring I’m too high up in a neighborhood
with too few tall buildings to bother. But now I did, and eavesdropped
on the faceless male voices whose language (Portuguese?) I didn’t
understand on the other side of my window. After they moved on to
the floor above mine the twisting rope securing their scaffold
remained, grey snaked with threads of pink and yellow tautly bifurcating the skyline. And I was propelled, by imperative, to action.
I cleaned the apartment, took out the trash, recycling, compost.
Paid outstanding bills. Canceled via email a Friday morning doctor’s

80

Anna Mehler Paperny

appointment and plans to watch a documentary with a friend that
evening. Then I swallowed all the Parnate, my antidepressant, that I
could handle.
Hundreds of those lovely circular scarlet pills tipped into my
palms and tossed to the back of my throat. I’d just refilled my prescription and had at least six weeks on hand—about 4.2 grams of
active ingredient. My gag reflex rebelled before I’d emptied the last
pill bottle but I took enough—at least 3 grams—to comprise what
should have been a lethal dose. Or so the papers I’d found online
suggested. By this point I was being prescribed such a high dose, I’d
developed a freakish tolerance for the drug.
For a minute or two I felt great. Surprisingly great. Like all conventional antidepressants, Parnate doesn’t have an immediate effect
and isn’t supposed to. But I’d taken a monster amount and got a
momentary high out of it. That didn’t last long. I felt very awful very
quickly. Dizzy and nauseous and trembly, unable to focus on any of
the fiction I’d assembled by my bed to kill time. I breathed through
my nose and swallowed repeatedly to keep sloshing stomach contents from rising to greet my upper esophagus. I tried to focus my
unraveling attention on the window-cleaners’ rope outside my
window; on the labels on the world map on the opposite wall.
It was the questions that did it. The dumbest questions popped
into my flailing mind—about labor rights and protections for
people working on high-rise scaffolding; the places I’d never visited; the narrative arc of the book I’d just started (Dust, by Yvonne
Adhiambo Owuor. A great read, if tough to follow while drugaddled). These were questions I wanted to be alive to ask. It’s a
curious revelation—like getting a second wind when you’re about
to collapse, combined with the sense of almost locking yourself out
of the house. I wasn’t happy. I wasn’t hopeful. But I wanted to know
things I didn’t yet know.
I rocketed to the bathroom, watery Parnate filling the toilet with
vivid fuchsia. I had the sudden urge to take a photo, willed myself
to grab my camera on the other side of the apartment. But I wasn’t

Getting in Trouble

81

moving. It didn’t feel like I was having trouble moving. I just wasn’t
moving. Noticed from a distance that, as I washed my hands and
face and tried to brush my teeth, I couldn’t stop shaking. I’d grown
used to antidepressants giving me microtremors. But these were
not micro. I gripped or leaned against the white buzzing counter,
unworried and unthinking.
Time passed faster than it should have. I retrieved my phone and
watched the minutes tick by and battery drop one percentage point
at a time. Exchanged texts with the friend I was supposed to meet,
who’d kept my ticket, who urged me to cab it to the movie theater.
I registered detachedly how slow I was to dredge up words, how
uncoordinated my fingers. I switched to a more predictive text input
method on my phone only to find myself transfixed for ten, fifteen,
twenty minutes at a time by the options it suggested. What did I
want to say? The conversation did not go far. I wrote “sorry” a lot. By
now it was late. Or dark, anyway. I knew I should email my psychiatrist, whose appointment I’d canceled, but couldn’t unlock my
laptop. Had my password changed? Had I forgotten it? Even then, it
did not occur to me that I was just messily mashing the keyboard,
fingers like hot dogs.
I was intermittently awake for much of the night. I couldn’t figure
out why the city lights outside had all turned deep red, then green
hours later. My eyes ached. There was still a delirium-inducing
amount of neurotransmitter bouncing around synaptic clefts in
every part of my body, from brain to gastrointestinal tract.
The next fourteen hours are fuzzy. When I wasn’t asleep I sleepwalked or went dazed through drunken motions. I only registered
efforts to reach me enough to avoid them. During a moment of
semiconsciousness I tried to respond to a text from my sister, who’d
asked me to check out an apartment for her that weekend. Typed
garbled nonsense. Much later I was shocked to find photos with
that day’s time-stamp on my camera’s memory card, which means
at some point I must have gotten up to shoot the view from my bedroom window.

82

Anna Mehler Paperny

That evening: more knocking, which I ignored. But then I heard
keys rattling in the door as it swung open.
I remember the desperate dismay I felt as I leaped out of bed, halfdressed, and registered the pair of paramedics and the superintendent who’d let them in. I tried to piece together who had sent them.
I willed my facial muscles and vocal chords to form words that would
somehow compel them to go away and leave me alone. But I couldn’t.
There’s a disorienting panic at the sudden inability to communicate, like stepping forward and finding only air where ground
should be. Whatever I did or didn’t say was enough to convince
them I should be hospitalized. I can’t remember what I grabbed as
they ushered me out the door but I remember going to grab a book
when they stopped me.
“You won’t need a book.”
Lie. Bold-faced lie. But I was in no position to argue and lacked
the motor skills to smuggle out reading material.
I couldn’t tell you how I teleported to the ambulance—I mean,
I assume I stood in the elevator, walked across the lobby and out the
door, but I may as well have choppered out of there for all I know.
And then there I was. Back in the psych ER at St. Joe’s—fluorescent beige assaulting my eyes, plasticky chairs stiff and sticky against
my limbs, cloaked again in mortification, my poor cousin summoned
by family bat signal to my side. Humiliating memories of being
instructed to pee in a cup but being too drugged up to do so or to
communicate my inability to do so; of getting my period in the crisis
ward (do not, ever, get your period in the crisis ward) and forgetting
the word for tampon. Then, several erased hours later, the sinking
déjà vu of awaking in an ICU bed, be-gowned and strapped to IVs.
My family flown in, again, freaked and teary but stoic and so goddamn loving I could not deal.
Failed suicides are not fun for emergency health workers, but I
was an especially weird case. I remember having to get my blood
work done a second time because apparently my circulatory, respiratory, nervous systems were functioning better than they should

Getting in Trouble

83

have been for someone with that much tranylcypromine inside her.
At some point a physician returned with a scan of my brain (don’t
ask me when in the previous fourteen hours that happened; I’ve no
clue) asking if I’d had a stroke. It took a bit of back and forth for them
to confirm that this scar tissue was, indeed, a relic of my first suicide
attempt, my pal antifreeze.
The choking guilt of causing pain to those you love, of betraying
the trust of health practitioners who let you remain an outpatient
and fill a monthlong prescription, is only compounded by repetition.
Shuffling from the intensive care unit to the short-stay psych ward
is worse the second time around. You know what you’re facing and
you know you should know better. I was greeted by rueful nurses
who remembered me from forty-four months earlier; I pretended
I wasn’t such a space cadet as not to remember them.
No matter how nice you are and no matter whom you sweet-talk,
if you’ve just tried to kill yourself you’re certifiable.
You’d think I’d be used to this but to have my craziness once
again negate my freedom of movement was tough to bear. In no small
part because the rules had changed thanks to an uptick in elopees
and a couple of high-profile, outcry-provoking suicides in the region
by inpatients who’d supposedly been under intensive psychiatric
observation. I couldn’t wear grown-up-person clothes. I couldn’t
leave the small windowless ward, not even with a chaperone. Again,
I understand the public health concerns at the prospect of people
like me doing rash things while in care. But even inmates in solitary
confinement are entitled to an hour of fresh air a day. (They rarely
get it in any meaningful way, and that’s unconscionable. But still.)
I somehow prevailed on the empathic staff psychiatrist on duty
that weekend to allow me off the Form, to stay as a voluntary inpatient in the short-term psych ward. I cannot adequately express the
degree to which this simple act ameliorated my life in the immediate term.
Back to the psych ward. You know the drill. Sleeplessness that
defied the earplugs and meditation apps the nurses gave me. Three

84

Anna Mehler Paperny

tasteless mushy meals a day that I pushed around my tray while engaging in reluctant fragmented conversation with my fellow inmates.
I was more honest with my kind health practitioner interrogators
this time around: I knew myself better and wasn’t as desperate to
prove my sanity. My expectations were low—I knew better than
to expect any quick fixes—and I genuinely tried to engage in whatever treatment was put before me. I also got to know these nurses
and social workers better. Talked with them about their lives, their
hobbies, their teens’ growing pains, adopted children, mixed-race
families, workplace politics. Most had been propelled into the field
by personal confrontations with mental illness, but their career
choice still astonishes me. I implored trainee residents rotating
through my ward to stick with this specialization. That weird plea
from an oversolicitous mental patient could well have had the opposite effect.
My psych ward cohabitants were much more diverse this time
around. A young black woman who donned her hijab as soon as she
graduated from hospital gown to real clothes—imagine being told
you’re too crazy for your articles of faith—asked which way was
east so she could pray. It took a nurse and me a minute or two to
figure it out; this would have been easier if we’d had windows in the
ward, dammit. I was no longer the youngest one there. A lanky,
sallow young man who worked airport security had checked h­ imself
in when his death obsession overpowered him. He was terrified
he’d be fired for taking too many sick days. Another man, in his
midtwenties, had been arrested at the train tracks where he was
prowling and preparing to throw himself in front of a locomotive.
He was charged with trespassing (criminalizing suicidality seems
like a great idea, right?) and had to call his parole officer from the
patient landline on the counter. He read thick books on computer
programming in between bouts of electroconvulsive therapy.
They’d wheel him in afterward in a wheelchair and he’d be sleepy,
slow, forgetful for a day or two. I don’t know if the treatments did
their job. I don’t know what happened to the trespassing charge.

Getting in Trouble

85

I felt I’d aged much more than the three-and-a-half years since my
last inpatient stint. I felt decades older than the young girls in their
early twenties brought sobbing into the ward by grimly desperate
families, girls who snapped at the nurses and sequestered themselves in the dim behind bedside curtains. I was suddenly the most
experienced person in the ward, the one who knew the rules for
different forms, knew how often the psychiatrist would come and
how much face time you could expect to get.
And my family was there. Again. I marinated in useless post-facto
guilt. They brought me snacks and news from the outside world—
there had been a major boxing match that week; apparently the
domestic abuser won. We cackled too loudly, joked inappropriately,
read aloud from newspapers and made each other guess which headlines were real and which we’d invented. Another lovely thing about
not being formally committed (thanks to that kindly psychiatrist)
was not needing them to chaperone me everywhere. I could leave
the hospital for brief stints and meet them for dinner or whatever
like a normal human being. I was irrationally worried that someone
from work would see me and call me out for not really being sick. But
it felt so great to locomote independently.
Let the record show I was a model patient. I changed my sheets
daily from the linen stacked on shelves by the washroom. I made
small talk and acted like a person who enjoys other people. I tried to
explain ward protocol to the uninitiated. I loaned books destined
never to be returned. I could have signed myself out but stayed for
as long as the staff psychiatrist recommended, even when it meant
sticking around an extra weekend so I could get a more complete
assessment the following Monday. Before taking off I even did a
weird mock assessment with a bunch of friendly, wide-eyed doctors
in training, during which I told the truth to the best of my ability
despite feeling I was either too crazy or not crazy enough to be a representative sample. I’ve no idea if I helped or hindered their training
but I got a coffee shop gift card out of it, so I win.
∙∙∙

86

Anna Mehler Paperny

Taking drugs sucks but my god, withdrawing from them is
worse.
My psychiatrist decided my Parnate overdose indicated it was
time to wean me off Parnate. So he prescribed an antipsychotic olanzapine bridge during the weeks-long washout period before moving
me to a new drug (you’ve gotta wait for the old one to clear out); and
that wasn’t enough to keep me from being an emotional train wreck
after leaving hospital. And, as tends to be the case in downward spirals, my cognition was crap. It didn’t even occur to me to attribute
this total garbage feeling to antidepressant withdrawal until someone else pointed it out. I was on vacation spending a few days at my
friend Omar’s place in Portland, Oregon, so irrationally despondent
that I convinced myself I needed to leave so as not to inflict my
despair on him. He stopped me, and on an aimless impromptu sightseeing drive that would include visiting a Vietnam War memorial
asked me what was up.
“I don’t know.”
“Are you still seeing your doctor guy?”
“Yeah. . . .”
“Have you switched up your meds at all?”
“Yeah, I’m off the stuff I was on before but I have this weird inbetween period before I can start new stuff, because serotonin—”
“OK yeah, I think we’ve figured out the problem here.”
“. . .”
So that was a fun time. I had a similar experience while chasing
Hurricane (later downgraded to tropical depression) Florence in
North Carolina for Reuters in 2018. When my editors asked me to
extend my stay I of course acquiesced, even though it meant I would
run out of meds—I’d brought just enough to get me through the
week as planned. I tried getting my doctor to call a North Carolina
pharmacy, I walked into an urgent care clinic, I got my sister to try
to mail meds but still ended up sitting shaking in the Raleigh airport,
three days into going unwillingly cold turkey. Thankfully getting

Getting in Trouble

87

back on the meds swiftly recalibrated my neurochemical equilibrium. But fuck.
Seriously, no matter how useless your drugs are (or seem) I highly
recommend talking to your doctor before you go rogue and stop
taking them. Your synaptic clefts will thank me.

11
A Pill-Popping Parade
Turns out I have a great metabolism for toxins. So says my
­psychiatrist—the second one I saw in the hospital, the deep-voiced
runner and motorcyclist who agreed to take me on as an outpatient
and has seen me regularly, dealing with my freak-outs, meltdowns,
and cynicism, for the past nine years—when he ups the dosage of
my latest drug for the umpteenth time. This freakish toxin tolerance does not apply to food or to booze, unfortunately. But fill me
with neurotransmitter-altering substances notorious for wreaking
havoc on gastrointestinal tracts and sundry endocrine mechanics,
and they zip unnoticed through my bloodstream.
I am a reluctant pill-popper. I started out militantly opposed to
pharmacological treatment. I’d heard and believed all the horror
stories: THat these drugs wouldn’t work but would have devastating
side effects; that they’d turn me into a different person; that they’d
leave me neither happy nor miserable but merely an unfeeling automaton lost in a neutralizing fog. That they’d backfire and just make me
want to kill myself even more.
My psychiatrist had little sympathy for these fears. How could I
claim to want to get better—as I had, vehemently, to get him and my
parents and everyone else off my back and to get out of psych-ward
custody and back to work—if I was unwilling to try even the most
basic meds?

92

Anna Mehler Paperny

So, OK, fine. I swallowed my objections and a tiny daily pill in
the hopes of being set free of the locked ward.
With the benefit of hindsight, I would like to note that my acquiescence was influenced by substantial pressure: I wanted to leave the
hospital; leaving hospital required a doctor’s approval. I wanted to
go back to work; my workplace wanted a doctor’s approval. My doctor
wanted me on meds. Of course I went on meds. Years later I think
this was the right move but I maybe made it for not the best reasons.
So I launched myself onto the psychopharmacological merry-­
go-round.
I started on a tiny dose of a little white pill called Cipralex (the
brand name for escitalopram). It’s one of the newer drugs in a group
known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs—brace
yourself for a whack of acronyms) and their great trick is supposed
to be keeping more serotonin bouncing around your synaptic clefts.
Like most of the drugs I took, Cipralex has been accused of being a
“me-too” antidepressant,1 where a tiny molecular alteration to an
existing compound used for the same purpose does little to make it
more efficacious but, once approved, allows drug companies to
establish or preserve a lucrative patent while competing in the same
therapeutic space.2
For a long time serotonin was believed to be The Answer—the
key to depression, mood regulation, and happiness. It’s basically a
chemical messenger your body produces that carries signals from
one neuron to another, from your brain to your gut to your blood.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are supposed to selectively
keep the serotonin bouncing about in the gaps between neurons,
the synaptic clefts, stopping it from being reabsorbed (that’s the
reuptake) back into the neuron. Instead, the serotonin just keeps
making you happy as it bounces around for extended periods of time
in those clefts. In theory, anyway.
Then it was thought The Answer was serotonin along with a
couple of other neurotransmitters: dopamine and norepinephrine.
They, too, are chemical messengers, bouncing around your synaptic

A Pill-Popping Parade

93

clefts between neurons before being sucked in, reconstituted, and
shot back out again.
But the truth is, these popular explanations of antidepressant
mechanisms are wrong. In theory, depression negates happiness;
antidepressants alleviate depression symptoms; antidepressants
increase concentration of serotonin, dopamine, and their chemical
cousins; ergo serotonin and dopamine create happiness. Wrong. I
spent years picturing the synaptic cleft as pinball machine, reuptake
inhibitors as “ball lock” mechanisms allowing a player with my
cruddy emotional reflexes to keep more balls active, more happy
lights flashing, more digital points accumulating.
Doesn’t work that way. Neurotransmitters are not discrete silvery
balls but molecular combinations of a series of smaller balls that keep
getting broken down and put back together once they get yanked
back into the neuron. And as I was to learn, increasing concentrations of one or all of those neurotransmitters does not guarantee
happiness or even the alleviation of despair.
So our decades-old assumptions about, first, what those neurotransmitters do for us and, second, what drugs do to those
­neurotransmitters, are primitive at best. Large amounts of the bodily
chemicals that psychiatric drugs target exist outside of the brain—
they proliferate in your stomach, intestines, platelets. Turns out, we
have only the vaguest idea how they work on a biochemical level, and
no clue how that biochemical reaction changes your mood.
The depth of that uncertainty is destabilizing in the extreme when
you’re depending on those drugs to keep you going. So I can understand the allure of simple, wrong explanations. In the face of so much
weird stuff going on in your brain, you fill in the gaps in comprehension however you can.
The first time I swallowed a single small elliptical white Cipralex
pill, standing beside my curtained-off hospital bed, I was petrified,
convinced it would brainwash me, rob me of personality. I sent a
panicky idiotic text to a friend: “I’ll love you even if this thing totally
wrecks my brain forever, OK?”

94

Anna Mehler Paperny

I waited. It didn’t. Apart from a little bit of jitters and a little bit
of drowsiness, both of which soon dissipated, I experienced zero side
effects from that first drug. This pattern repeated, more or less, with
every drug I was prescribed: No seizures, no massive weight gain or
loss, no loss of libido, no loss of self, no loss of emotional range, no
worsening of suicidal thoughts, which I was learning to call by their
more official-sounding name of suicidal ideation. Chronic lassitude
and fatigue were, for me, more a familiar symptom of depression
than a side effect of any new medication. Ditto sporadic insomnia,
which for me seemed more a function of tightly wound anxiety than
pharmacological intervention. Sure, there was wonkiness: Some
drugs made me trembly, some made me antsy, one made me sweaty;
one made me dizzy if I rose from a chair too quickly right after
increasing a dose; one blurred my vision (we rapidly decreased that
dose); one made me sneeze endlessly; some made me nauseous,
especially on an empty stomach, especially with espresso on an
empty stomach, which makes for less than pleasant morning commutes. But that’s par for the course when you bombard a GI tract
with digestion-­muscle-moving meds and nothing to digest.
Not all of those dodged bullets were as great as they sound: Intensifying social withdrawal—a typical symptom of depression—meant
I was going for weeks without interacting with anyone outside of work
and psychiatric appointments and maybe family phone calls. I was
certainly not banging anyone. Preserving one’s sex drive is hardly a
blessing when you’re simultaneously suicidal and sexually frustrated.
And any advantage conferred by my lack of side effects was erased
by my lack of any effects, period. I felt like I was popping sugar pills.
My psychiatrist contended that the lack of improvement was at least
partly in my head: that I’d have been far worse off—and may have
killed myself for real—without that parade of meds. And he could
be right. (His counterfactual’s impossible to disprove, anyway.)
There were certainly periods when things got better, or plateaued,
and periods when they got worse, and it’s possible my meds played
a role in those shifts. It’s also possible they didn’t. But I wanted to

A Pill-Popping Parade

95

feel better: not happiness or even an escape from despair but simply
a consistent, propulsive sense of purpose. I need to keep getting up
and out of bed and into the office in the morning.
Over the next nine years we experimented with up to fifteen different drugs in dozens of different combinations. As I write this we’re
considering others. We haven’t yet found a combination that works.
We tried the circular lilac pills of bupropion, the generic version
of Wellbutrin, which targets dopamine and norepinephrine. It was
not until much later I learned Wellbutrin has become a common
drug of misuse:3 It produces a powerful high comparable to amphetamines and crack cocaine if you crush and then snort or inject it.
Doing so can also produce gross, potentially fatal abscesses or blood
clots or masses of dead tissue. Don’t chance it. (That said, I have a
couple dozen pills left lying around, if anyone wants to hit me up.)
We tried lithium, white and pale pink capsules. Popping lithium
freaked me out at first—it’s the one they give people with bipolar
disorder, to balance the swing between manic highs and depressive
lows, the one Claire Danes’s bipolar character Carrie Mathison takes
in Homeland to keep herself together. It’s an effective mood stabilizer
but long-term use can kick you in the kidneys if you aren’t careful.4
A friend in family medicine told me he had a patient whose bipolarity was so debilitating she’d been on high doses of lithium since early
childhood. It regulated her mood but messed with her insides over
time. The trade-off was worth it, my friend said, for the three decades
of livable existence. Suicidal ideation at least negates fear of terminal
illness, which is a plus.
But more than kidney failure, what scared me was that being
prescribed lithium proved I was even crazier than I thought.
“Are you sure I’m not bipolar?” I asked my psychiatrist for the
zillionth time. “Are you sure?”
“You wish.”
I just don’t get the exuberant-invincible-impulsive-boundlessly
energetic episodes characteristic of mania. That didn’t stop me
from periodically suspecting I’d experienced a manic or hypomanic

96

Anna Mehler Paperny

episode. My psychiatrist raised his eyebrows at my descriptions of
such brief, bizarre bouts of irrational motivation or well-being.
“Yeah, no, that’s not mania. That’s called feeling normal.” The
fleeting sense of being energized by, engaged in, hopeful about what
I was doing felt so foreign I was sure it was symptomatic of another
mental disorder.
Lithium’s been used as a psychiatric medication for millennia.
The mineral was isolated and defined in the mid-nineteenth century
but its use goes as far back as the great Greek physician Galen, who
got manic patients to bathe in and drink alkaline, likely lithium-­
containing, water.5 But we don’t really know what it does for people
who aren’t manic-depressive. We don’t really know, on a molecular
level, what lithium does, period.6 But it is supposed to curb suicidal
ideation, which in my case was a fairly urgent necessity.
We tried Cymbalta, olive green and navy blue, to inhibit my
reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine. By this time I’d become
a reluctant expert at dry-swallowing handfuls of pills, throwing
them to the back of my throat and swallow-shuddering, swinging
my head side to side like a floppy-eared wet dog to encourage downward peristalsis.
We tried olanzapine, aka Zyprexa, an antipsychotic. It’s a terrible
thing to be told to take if you live in fear of losing your grip on reality. This fear dissipated with repetition, as I kept taking pills designed
for different kinds of disorders than what I thought I was going
through: Studies have found various mood stabilizers, antipsychotics, anticonvulsants, antianxiety meds, and other fun things can help
alleviate treatment-resistant depression, especially when combined
with a more conventional antidepressant.7 And our ignorance of
these drugs’ biomechanisms is about equal, so why not?
That was when we tried Parnate, an old-school MAOI, a monoamine oxidase inhibitor, that seemed to be working until I tried to
kill myself with it. Parnate, aka tranylcypromine, targets a different
step in the same neurochemical pathway: It impedes the breakdown
of all those neurotransmitters once they’re sucked back into the

A Pill-Popping Parade

97

neuron,8 so instead of being taken apart and rebuilt in the neuron
they just get shot back into the synapse to bounce around again like
those happy-making pinballs.
I asked a med-school friend if he’d ever prescribed an MAOI.
“Of course not. I’m not a dinosaur.”
MAOIs were popular in the 1950s and ’60s. They worked well, by
the flawed measures we have. But no one’s prescribed them much
since. There’s so little demand for these drugs that the Quebec
GlaxoSmithKline facility producing my Parnate put it on back order
at one point, making it unobtainable for weeks and sending me into
a minor panic, calling every pharmacist in the city seeking drugs.
It led to surreal scenes that made filling a prescription resemble the
world’s most boring iteration of The Wire:
Man in white coat slides white bag across counter.
“Do you want to count that?”
Open the crinkling white paper, rip staple and reach inside to roll the
cylindrical bottle of softly rattling pills out onto palm.
“Looks right. Thank you.” Pause. “So . . . I can come back in three
weeks for a refill?”
“Well, insurance usually prefers refilling at least two-thirds into dose,
but that’s four weeks’ worth, so, yeah, I guess. . . .”
“I mean, will you have enough? Will you run out again?”
“Oh. Right. Yeah, should be fine. And . . .” —glances around—“I
know who’ll have it. I’ll hook you up.”
All this for a plastic container of crimson pills that’d be way easier
to get if they had any street value whatsoever. The lack of demand
isn’t because MAOIs are less chemically efficacious than the various
reuptake inhibitors that replaced them.9 MAOIs are deemed too dangerous if you overdose, and possess so many unpleasant side effects,
even if taken as directed, that patients just stop taking them. For me,
this was the trembling- and vertigo-inducing drug. More troublesome were the nonsensical new dietary restrictions: MAOIs impede
your body’s ability to break down tyramine, found in a long list of
foods from cheese to draught beer (but not bottled; don’t ask me

98

Anna Mehler Paperny

why) to miso and other fermented soy products to cured or smoked
or pickled meats.
I cheated, of course. Usually because I forgot. And because
cheese. And because on the rare occasion I’d meet friends at a pub,
ordering bottled beer while everyone else sipped pints felt weird.
Most of the time this illicit ingestion made no difference. But sporadically it gave me hours-long killer headaches, pain pulsating
from somewhere beneath the front of my skull before eventually
dissipating. Each time I vowed never again to eat whatever had so
upset my wonky benighted internal chemistry—a pledge that
lasted a day, maybe.
Doses went up when shit got rough or after I’d passed some invisible tolerance boundary and I took them as directed and prayed
they worked with the same fervent hope you’d place in an amulet
of dried goat testicles, if you could read peer-reviewed papers about
the testicle-amulet’s efficacy online and pose goat-testicle questions
to the person who’d prescribed them to you.
But seriously: I believe in medicine and in scientific method; I
gradually got better at sorting bullshit claims of causation from more
believable ones; I got better at asking more informed nosy questions
about effects and efficacy during my psychiatric appointments. But
at the end of the day, health care relationships are predicated on
trust—brain-health relationships overwhelmingly so. In part because
all the things prescribed to me, all there was available to prescribe,
did pretty much the same thing, on a biochemical level, as far as we
know. And in part because the symptoms they were supposed to
alleviate are so tough to measure, especially because depression’s
proclivity for seeing everything through shit-colored glasses also
applies to one’s own prognosis. People with especially bad depression
tend to be the last ones to realize they’re getting better, but knowing
that hardly helps. I had to believe each pharmacological adjustment
would be the thing that tipped some imperceptible scale and took
the draining effort out of the simplest tasks, leaving me energy left
over for the projects meant to give life purpose.

A Pill-Popping Parade

99

My friend Omar called Parnate my hipster drug—“Really
old‑school; you’ve probably never heard of it.” For a while my psychiatrist seemed to think it was working, till that aforementioned
spectacular fuckup on my part eliminated it as an option.
We tried buspirone (Buspar), an anti-anxiety med.10 And Zoloft,
or sertraline, which targets serotonin (it was America’s mostprescribed psychiatric drug in 2016).11 We tried Lamictal (lamotrigine),
an anticonvulsant with the delicious potential for eating flesh—a very
rare, lurid, potentially lethal allergic reaction. Toxic epidermal necrolysis does pretty much exactly what its name suggests.12 Watch out for
painful red-purple rashes spreading from torso to face and limbs; for
inflamed sores in your eyes, mouth, genitals. Skin and mucous membranes blister and peel away. If left untreated the disease can wreak
deadly havoc on your internal organs. But to my dismay, no flesheating disease materialized; no skin sloughed off to reveal the oozing
dermis I’d been promised. Perhaps not so coincidentally, I clawed
lesions into my skin even more compulsively in the months following that disappointment, as though compensating for my lack of
dermal necrosis.
My psychiatrist thought maybe trying a stimulant would ameliorate my paralytic enervation. So we tried the generic version of
Adderall. Given Adderall’s reputed popularity as a drug of misuse
among overachieving students intent on pulling all-nighters, I
assumed I’d pop a cerulean-blue, Dijon-yellow two-tone capsule
and morph into a wicked-focused shark with a laser attached to my
head. Not so much. I felt normal. Was able to work, which was great,
but no better or more focused than before. No lasers. No searing
propulsive purposeful energy. This was a letdown.
We tried Trintellix, one of the newest and not-yet-well-­understood
antidepressants out there,13 but the pink egg-shaped pills did not seem
to help any.
Then another new-ish drug, Pfizer’s antipsychotic Zeldox
(ziprasidone). Only the brand name was available. At this point I
was uninsured and my drug bill topped $400 a month. I dipped into

10 0

Anna Mehler Paperny

my savings and tried, with little success, to cut down my spending
on necessities like food and books. For a while I was on an anti­
psychotic (ziprasidone), an anticonvulsant (lamotrigine), an
­a ntidepressant (sertraline) and a mood stabilizer (lithium) all at
once. I relied on my multicolored, fourteen-compartment dosette
to keep it all straight.
For all the potentially lethal things I put in my body on a daily
basis, it’s hilarious and not a little ironic that I remain alive. But it’s
grimly comforting to know my madcap psychopharmacological
hopscotch is not outside the norm. There’s been research supporting the use of various drug combos as adjunctive treatments for
depression that doesn’t respond to conventional antidepressants
right away, but it’s a crapshoot determining which you should try
and in what order.
This is true even for masters of the neuropharmacological craft.
Richard Friedman, the director of psychopharmacology at
Weill Cornell Medical College in New York, does this for a living.14
“Some [doctors] just clinically have a few they’re used to using and
they’re comfortable with, and they try them, and you could say,
‘Why are you using strategy A instead of B or C?’ and the answer’s
not going to be ‘Science.’” He’s tasked with figuring out what
alchemical medication cocktail to use on people who don’t get
better with the basic ones. (Andrew Solomon, the revered author
of The Noonday Demon, told me he swears by Friedman’s pharmacological acumen.) Faced with a degree of treatment-resistant
depression in a given patient, “I would give him something that, if
they’ve had it in the past, worked if they’ve had prior episodes of
depression. And, short of that, from a scientific point of view, you
could take a coin out of your pocket and flip it.”
Has he gotten better at this guessing game?
“I would like to say the answer to that is yes. If you asked me to
prove it, I couldn’t. So I’ll say yes, but. I don’t really know. Because
this is not science. This is clinical gut feeling.”
As few as one in four people start to feel better on the first

A Pill-Popping Parade

101

antidepressant they try, if they take it as directed and stick with it
for the six-plus weeks it’ll take to kick in. That cumulative remission rate goes up to about 70 percent if you include people who
go on to a second, third, or fourth cocktail of drugs plus psycho­
therapy, with a smaller proportion of the remaining suckers getting better at each treatment step. The National Institute of Mental
Health’s Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression
Study (call it STAR*D if you wanna impress your psychiatrist
friends) ran 3,671 depressed Americans through a flowchart of
treatments. People who didn’t respond to the first, second, or third
steps and continued on to step 4 tended to be slightly poorer and
older; they were more likely to be male, unemployed, and uninsured. People whose depression had started before age eighteen
and whose latest depressive episode has lasted for at least two years
were also more likely to continue to step 4. 15 Feels like I’m on
step 8,000.
So much for getting well. Staying well is another matter entirely.
Of all those people whose despair lifted on the first, second, third
or fourth treatment combo they tried, almost half will be plunged
back into despair, back to baseline within a year. “And then you’re
struggling to find out what is the next best treatment for them.” The
University of Texas Southwestern’s Madhukar Trivedi is another
master of his craft clearly distressed by the limitations of the field.
“The more treatment steps you need to get better, the higher the
relapse rate.” 16
In other words, the earlier your depression starts, the longer it
lasts and the longer you wait to start treatment, the longer it will take
for treatment to work and the more treatment combinations you’ll
need to try before something works. The longer your depression lasts
and the more steps it takes for you to find something that works, the
more likely it is you’ll relapse in a year and end up right back where
you started. The longer and deeper and more frequent your depressive episodes, the more likely they are to keep coming back as your
habit-loving brain starts to think this is normal.

102

Anna Mehler Paperny

The need for swift, effective action on depression makes it all the
more important to catch it early and makes our lack of effective,
accessible treatment all the more inexcusable.
Even using the most optimistic efficacy estimate we’re still left
with about seven-million-odd North Americans enduring a chronic,
debilitating illness and getting no lasting respite from any available
treatment.
“There’s still going to be a huge gap of unmet medical need that
is just awful,” says Steven Hyman, who heads the Harvard-MIT
Broad Institute’s Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research.17 He’s
spent years wrestling with treatment options for mood disorders,
or lack thereof. “Even those who don’t kill themselves, their lives
are very problematic. Because not only are they suffering but they
are, I think we know by now, they’re highly impaired.”
(It’s at this point in the interview I find myself at pains not to
bellow, “I knowwwww, right?”)
Given all that, is it any surprise that so few people suffering with
depression take their drugs as directed? Even if they don’t mess
with your bodily functions, popping them daily for years on end with
so little to show for it is really, really discouraging. Adherence rates
in the medium term (three months from initial prescription) are
about 40 percent, on average. By comparison, almost three-quarters
of people with hypertension and two-thirds of people with type 2
diabetes take their meds as instructed at least 80 percent of the time.18
This isn’t because people with severe depression just aren’t motivated
enough to get better, although that’s doubtless part of the issue:
When severely depressed, it’s impossible to get motivated enough to
do much of anything. All too frequently, though, antidepressants’
side effects are so intolerable they outweigh the drugs’ (gradual,
incremental) benefits. So people just stop taking them. The most
common complaint is the havoc they wreak on your gastrointestinal
tract, flooding it with neurotransmitters, increasing motility, and
making your gut all jumpy. That’s why doctors recommend against
ingesting these drugs on an empty stomach: A little substrate can

A Pill-Popping Parade

103

give those muscles something to play with so they’re not quite as
cranky. Then you get anxiety, agitation, insomnia—also frequent
antidepressant side effects, which is especially annoying because
these tend to be either symptoms of depression or exacerbators of it.
But the one you’ll hear about the most is sexual dysfunction.
Because who wants that? What further proof do you need that psychiatry is an enemy of joy? These drugs can lower your libido, make
penis-owners impotent, delay orgasm, or make it unreachable altogether. We’re not quite sure how this works; it may have something
to do with receptors in your spinal cord.19 Antidepressants’ cockblock effect could be overblown, though: Depression can do the
same thing. (For this same reason, I’m personally skeptical of claims
that antidepressants make you suicidal. It’s akin to blaming chemotherapy for metastatic tumors or lozenges for a sore throat. Just
’cause a treatment is inadequately efficacious doesn’t mean it’s
responsible for symptoms of the illness it’s supposed to treat.
Antidepressants can, however, make you well enough to act on suicidal thoughts you lacked the energy and wherewithal to act on
before but that you were having anyway. Because life is a cruel trick.)
When every drug you take falls short of your desperate desire for
remission, or when you simply get fed up with side-effect roulette,
it’s easy to think it doesn’t matter whether you take the meds or not.
Wrong. Wrongety-wrong-wrong. I’ve had moments where I was
convinced a drug was doing fuckall only for me to realize how much
worse shit got when I was taken off it.
Just because something isn’t nearly good enough doesn’t make it
entirely useless.
The ease with which antipsychiatry types use ignorance of how
depression works and the limitations of existing treatments to bolster their arguments that the illness itself is a sham drives Madhukar
Trivedi nuts. “I think that the efficacy challenges are real. We need
to confess that. On the other hand, I can tell you that a lot of chronic
medical diseases have the same efficacy challenges. We don’t question the existence of those diseases. We become humbled by the

104

Anna Mehler Paperny

outcomes. The jump in logic is remarkable—that because the efficacy is modest maybe it’s not a real disease.”
He sees two fundamental problems: A lack of information—
people don’t know what antidepressants can do, could do, probably
won’t do. And a lack of seriousness accorded to the condition they’re
supposed to ameliorate. “I still get asked questions about whether
this is some kind of brain disorder.” (For the record and the umpteenth time, he says, it is.)
There’s evidence different kinds of treatment tend to work better
when combined—drugs plus psychotherapy is probably better than
either in isolation; certain combinations of drugs may work differently on your brain; exercise can be a helpful adjunct to whatever
else you’ve got going on (maybe something to do with those endorphins, or some other chemical reaction). But clinicians rarely coordinate them. “We should not rest on our laurels as soon as someone
gets into remission. We need to think about what else needs to be
done. . . . When you add those treatments that work potentially
through a different brain mechanism, you get higher rates of remission. Enough to be significant, absolutely.”
It’s hardly encouraging that the efficacy rates for antidepressants
have actually dropped over the past half century. But this may have
less to do with how good these drugs are and more to do with changes
in how we’re measuring them: Studies are getting better at differentiating between wishful thinking and statistically valid results. The
underrepresentation of people of color in clinical trials has resulted
in meds that may not work as well in populations we know are already
underserved. At the same time, changes to the way we define depression have included a whack of new people, which means drug trials
suddenly contain more people with milder versions of the disorder,
who we now know are way less likely to derive any real benefit from
antidepressants. 20
We’re most aware of the people who aren’t helped by psychiatric
meds, rather than people who are, which could be exacerbating our
confusion over what actually works. “We see and hear the untreated,

A Pill-Popping Parade

105

acutely psychotic shoeless man screaming in the street, or our
loved ones who have not yet responded to their medications. By
contrast, the mental illnesses of our colleagues or friends who have
remitted with treatment are invisible,” says Benoit Mulsant, the
clinician scientist with CAMH who specializes in “hard-to-treat”
older populations.21 He also notes that part of antidepressants’
perceived inefficacy could be due to premature discontinuation:
If you just go off your meds, or go off them prematurely, they aren’t
going to make you better. This makes sense. But if the best meds
you have are so awful for so many and require such a long-term
commitment that people in the grips of illness don’t bother, then
your meds kind of suck.

12
Good Noticing!
Combined with, and throughout, my variegated parade of drugs
was cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), which for me resembled
more than anything an endless sadomasochistic Socratic logic
exercise.
Pioneered by Aaron Beck in the 1960s,1 it uses thoughts as levers
to tame and defuse overpowering emotions: You record your emotions, the thought underpinning them, and the evidence supporting
and refuting that thought in the hopes of getting a more balanced
view of yourself in the world. It’s supposed to make your brain more
skeptical of its own bombardment of toxic convictions, carving out
new, less harmful tracks of automatic thoughts and, hopefully, avoiding the vortex of inescapable despondent paralysis.
The evidence for CBT and a host of other psychotherapies in
treating depression is pretty robust. Evidence-based psychotherapy
has been found to enhance the effects of antidepressants2 and lessen
the likelihood of relapse.3 Most people, when you ask them, prefer
talk to pills. Most physicians either don’t ask or don’t care: Stats
indicate meds are used way more frequently, while psychotherapy
use actually declined in the United States between 1996 and 2005.4
I struggled for a bajillion years to do the “thought records” that are
at the center of CBT efficaciously. Long after I basically memorized
the patronizing Mind Over Mood book and the conceptual structure

Good Noticing!

107

of its written exercises, I couldn’t make it work when I needed it
most.5 All well and good to convince yourself of the fallacies of your
convictions while you’re mostly OK; not super helpful if you can’t
do it when shit gets real. Nonetheless, this method pulled me back
from the ledge innumerable times. When I could make it work, it
was great.
Mindfulness sounds flaky. The group classes are flakier. At my
psychiatrist’s urging I shelled out $600 for a course—not cool: THis
exhortation on his part was unhappily timed with a stint during
which I was uninsured. The classes consisted of a series of early-­
evening two-hour sessions where a pair of practitioners, one a registered naturopath and the other an MD, walked us in a group through
various thought exercises. The idea is to become hyperaware—mindful!—of thoughts and emotions preoccupying you and, rather than
becoming subsumed in them, putting a bit of perspective-enhancing
distance between you and whatever the overpowering thought happens to be. I found their encouraging monologues aggravatingly saccharine but listening to other people voice their psychic hang-ups
was illuminating. Realizing the similarities and constants between
people’s shit, as well as the striking differences, puts things in perspective in a helpful way. More importantly, despite my disdain,
these methods actually kind of work.
I had to physically restrain myself every time one of the mindfulness course’s facilitators chirped “Good noticing!” But noticing
is, seriously, a helpful thing to be able to do. The mere act of acknowledging a potent recurring automatic assumption does sometimes
help me curb what would otherwise precipitate a spiral of awfulness. At the very least, it cues you to notice when this shit crops up
again and again. Whoa, that’s a bad feeling. What’s that? Oh, it’s selfrecrimination. I’m thinking I should die because I’ve ruined everything.
That’s interesting. I had that same thought yesterday, too. Six hundred
dollars was an exorbitant amount of cash to spend on this, but teaching yourself to become aware of your own feelings, dis­entangling
feelings from thoughts and separating both from your self is actually

108

Anna Mehler Paperny

worthwhile. I still try to create distance between my self and my
thoughts, with varying degrees of success. Good noticing!

Tr eatment method matters but its effectiveness depends on
the person giving it to you. Despite knowing psychotherapy works
and knowing which forms of psychotherapy work, most people don’t
get psychotherapy that’s been proven to work in a way that’s proven
to work. Canada’s psychotherapy landscape isn’t quite the free-­
for-all it was three decades ago, but it’s close.6 In many provinces
I could hang up a “psychotherapist” sign on my apartment door and
start charging $400 an hour to talk to people about their problems.
Healing crystals: $50 extra. Most regulatory bodies will specify the
kind of degree you need or the school where you can get it. Almost
none will tell you what methods are legit and which are crap, much
less check up on you.7 Credential confusion in psychotherapy presents yet another way to miss out on effective care. It’s hard to know
what you’re looking for if you don’t have a background in the field.
As a result, a lot of people get therapy that isn’t proven to work.
Even if the average therapy-seeking layperson knew what therapies have been proven to work for whatever ails them—and I’m
willing to bet most don’t—“they don’t have a prayer of easily knowing whether a given therapist actually delivers,” says Michael
Schoenbaum, a senior advisor on the epidemiology and economics
of mental health care at the National Institute of Mental Health.8
One of his “formative experiences” in the field of mental health care
happened at a meeting, watching the medical director of a major
insurer bemoaning his inability to tell with any degree of certainty
whether the therapists whose services he was reimbursing were
actually any good at delivering therapy.
He is clearly still incredulous that, even in a field characterized by
subjectivity and uncertainty, we aren’t even acting on the information we have to make sure people are getting care (and organizations
are paying for care) that actually works. We’d never accept a

Good Noticing!

109

choose-your-own-adventure approach to dental abscesses but we’re
totally cool with that norm for the world’s leading cause of disability.
Either way, it detracts somewhat from the relief of knowing your
soul-destroying state of being is a disease outside your control if you’re
then told to think your way out of it. I had a bitch of a time getting
the hang of CBT, especially in those low moments when I needed a
cognitive-emotional lifeline the most. And sometimes, in the depths
of a snotty crying jag in your psychiatrist’s office, being told your
thought patterns are “too outcome-focused” is not super helpful.
But I swear, I completed thought records and swallowed my meds
religiously. Didn’t skip doses when they became ruinously expensive
or hoard them when overdose possibilities tantalized. I held my
breath and willed them to start working. I knew I was running out
of drugs to try. And I knew that, once that happened, we might have
to turn to more drastic measures.

13
Zapping, Shocking, and Burning
Your Brain into Submission
When one drug after another failed to deliver desired results, at my
psychiatrist’s suggestion in the fall of 2018 we tried repetitive trans­
cranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS)—a treatment still so experimental it wasn’t covered by Ontario’s public health system: My treatments,
fifteen sessions’ worth, were paid for through donations.
Like just about everything else we use or want to use or are
considering using to treat depression, TMS began as a tool for
something else. It zapped magnetic waves at different bits of your
brain to measure brain activity and track what happened when
those neurons contracted.
“That same magnetic field you could use to evaluate the brain
could be harnessed to treat it,” says Jeff Daskalakis, a director at
Toronto’s Temerty Center for Therapeutic Brain Intervention at
CAMH. He tells me as we walk through the Temerty Center’s beigeish halls that buzzing your brain with magnetic waves every five or
ten seconds will depolarize neurons—make brain cells pop on, then
off. Keep doing it, and you might change something.1
The idea behind repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
(rTMS—repeated zapping) is to do the same thing electroconvulsive
therapy (ECT) does but in a lower-maintenance, less resource-­
intensive, less freaky way. ECT uses jolts of electricity to give your

Zapping, Shocking, and Burning Your Brain into Submission

111

brain a hard reboot through a general seizure. The rTMS technique
uses a magnetic field to give more specific parts of your brain a hard
reboot and avoids the seizure altogether.
He explains that “to the brain, magnetic fields and electrical fields
are indistinguishable. They both cause depolarization of neurons.
But they do it in different ways.” Electrical fields hit the cerebrospinal fluid like a stone in a pond—ripples everywhere, sending those
electrical signals all over the brain. Magnetic fields, on the other
hand, hit a targeted area and stop. “So when you stimulate an area
that big”—he makes a circle with his thumb and forefinger—“it stays
that big.”
The plus for rTMS is that it’s easier to perform and implement,
and easier for people to access, accept, and attempt. But studies so
far indicate it isn’t nearly as effective as ECT.2 And the psychiatrist
and ECT evangelist Charles Kellner, of New York’s Mount Sinai, is
dismissive of the suggestion that zapping someone with magnetic
energy is a viable alternative for people who’d otherwise be candidates for electrically induced seizures.
“Patients can do whatever they want, but my opinion is that ECT
is a serious treatment for a serious illness—rTMS is much more a faddish treatment for very mild depression. They are not comparable.
They’re not for the same population and they shouldn’t be confused.” 3
Back in Toronto, Jeff Daskalakis is more diplomatic. He thinks
the issue with ECT is twofold: First is stigma, the deep-seated fear
that people hold toward it and that often is perpetuated by psychiatrists themselves; the second is ECT’s limited availability—he
figures the province of Ontario has the capacity to administer ECT
to maybe 1 percent of the people with treatment-resistant depression
who could benefit from it. “So rTMS is designed to bridge some of
that gap to get people better. . . . [It] is potentially . . . a lot easier to
tolerate. There’s virtually no stigma behind it. And so the idea of
having rTMS deployed widely across the province is very appealing.”
(It didn’t work for me, and my psychiatrist thinks it may have
had some unpleasant cognitive side effects: I found myself unable to

112

Anna Mehler Paperny

make the most basic decisions, the struggle to synthesize bits of
information sending me into a panicky tailspin. But I tried it during
an especially awful fall during which I could barely make it out of
bed to go to my rTMS sessions, so perhaps that’s why.)

A kinder version of the shock treatment that sidelined Jack
Nicholson in One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest and elicited such horror
in Janet Frame’s mid-twentieth-century New Zealand madhouse
prose remains, according to the data we have, one of the most effective treatments for cases of depression that defy treatment. Positive
response rates immediately following a course of acute ECT, usually
several sessions over a week or two, can top 75 percent.4
Whether you can maintain that remission or degree of improvement is another story altogether. “For people who have very severe
depression, it’s a very important option. And it’s used far too little,”
Thomas Insel, the former National Institute of Mental Health director, tells me. When I first spoke with him by phone he was helming
the country’s public mental health epicenter but would shortly after
leave for the world of mental health tech start-ups.
How does it work?
Science is still trying to figure that out. Some theories postulate
that the seizures ECT induces somehow spark the creation of new,
stronger, more active neurons. Thomas Insel compares it to manually rebooting your computer—“just hitting the reset button.” 5 The
single most effective treatment-resistant-depression treatment available is the neurological equivalent of a hard reboot—an IT specialist asking, “Well, have you tried switching it off and then on again?”
ECT has changed in the past half-century: Pulses instead of a
stream of electricity; general anaesthetic for the pain; muscle relaxant to keep you still; a Styrofoam-like bite block so you don’t chomp
your tongue; a whole team to do the procedure, including an anesthesiologist monitoring your heart rate, breathing, and blood pressure. You get electrodes on your scalp to measure your brain

Zapping, Shocking, and Burning Your Brain into Submission

113

activity and bespoke voltage titrated to your brain’s needs.6 You
turn on the electricity with a button and not, to my chagrin, the
kind of fun-size switch I’d envision Dr. Frankenstein using to animate his creation.
The electrical stimulus is measured in millicoulombs, set at
several times the minimum amount of energy it will take to induce
a full seizure in a person. At the right dose, four to eight seconds of
stimulus makes for twenty to sixty seconds of generalized seizure.
The whole thing, start to finish, takes about eight minutes. Then
you head to the recovery area and have some breakfast, because you
haven’t had anything to eat or drink in the eight or so hours prior to
the procedure. Coffee can be good, apparently, especially if you have
a post-seizure headache. The fine print is that you need these shocks
to your brain repeatedly in order for them to work in the long term—
the first round is maybe two or three a week, but “continuation” ECT
in the months following the first round make you much more likely
to stay well. And even then, your odds aren’t amazing: 37 percent of
the people in a 2016 study who got ten extra ECT treatments following their first acute round had relapsed within six months.7 Just as
worrying, for many, this treatment can mess with memory and cognition, although studies dispute how long the cognitive impairment
lasts and how much of it is due to the depression itself. You’ll probably
be groggy for about twenty minutes after the procedure. You shouldn’t
drive a car for the next day or so. General haziness may stick around
for a couple of weeks. Most people lose some memories—the most
vulnerable ones seem to be discrete recollections formed in the weeks
or months before treatment; a trip, perhaps, or a new acquaintance.
Most people get most memories back within six months of their last
round of ECT. But some are gone for good.
“It’s not as big a concern as most people think,” Charles Kellner
assures me over the phone from New York. “There’s no medical procedure without side effects, and some temporary recent memory loss
is a side effect of ECT for many patients.” He, for one, is tired of people’s electroconvulsive (do not call it electroshock) therapy

114

Anna Mehler Paperny

freak-outs. “The problem is that most people get their information
from the internet. . . . Even Wikipedia, which many people consider
reliable, the ECT page has been infiltrated by the Scientologists.”
He also tells me that ECT is being refined all the time, its negative side effects whittled away. Ultra-brief pulses, for example, seem
to minimize cognitive damage; ditto electrical pulses that target only
one side of the head instead of both. But these somewhat gentler
methods can also be less effective than the blunter versions.
Charles Kellner refused to talk about what percentage of people
who get ECT lose memories they never get back, because “it will be
misunderstood.” He says, reasonably enough, that people forget
things all the time and it’s tough to separate what the ECT made you
forget from what depression messed up in your memory from things
you would have forgotten anyway. He thinks we should stop worrying about that, period.
“What you have to understand is you would never do ECT for a
trivial reason. . . . If I were an oncologist instead of a psychiatrist and
you came to me with a life-threatening cancer and I said to you, ‘You
need chemotherapy to save your life and the chemotherapy is going
to cause you to lose your hair for six months’ and you said to me, ‘I’m
not going to have my lifesaving treatment because I don’t want to
lose my hair,’ it would be the same thing as a seriously depressed
patient saying, ‘I don’t want to have ECT because I’m going to have
a temporary, small amount of memory loss.’ It’s equally ludicrous.”
Maybe this argument convinces some patients. Maybe being told
you’re being ridiculous and your concerns are silly and memories are
no more valuable than hair, silly patient, can actually make you trust
a treatment you were leery of before. Call me crazy, but memory loss
worries me way more than hair loss. In my early forays into the mood
disorder universe, the very prospect of ECT petrified me.
But it’s easy to forswear icky interventions a week into beginning
treatment for this illness you just realized you had; much more difficult after a decade of debilitation. My ECT antipathy weakened
with every new drug regime. Truly, I have enormous respect for the

Zapping, Shocking, and Burning Your Brain into Submission

115

difficult decisions people make about their treatment.
My psychiatrist and I discussed it in passing but we shared the
same concern: Even if a workplace disability plan allowed me to
take weeks or months off work, even if I were confident of a return
to the office at some point in the future, how could I live in the
interim, and how could I work with compromised cognitive capacity that could last months or years? Yet one miserable May, desperate, I signed up for a dozen therapeutic seizures. They weren’t as bad
as feared, but they didn’t help much, and my memory lost weeks to
the sands of ECT time.
I’m not the only one imbued with a deep-seated fear of medically
administered brain electrocution. Rebranding electric cerebral jolts
as less painful, more humane, less likely to cause grand mal seizures
and proven to do wonders for people in the most catatonic states of
depression has been only partially successful so far. Psychiatrists
are fighting an uphill battle against decades of culturally ingrained,
once-well-founded public horror of the procedure—so much that
few public hospitals offer ECT.

What else is out there? A hole in your head.
Your brain has no pain sensors, so you only need a local anaesthetic on your scalp before a surgeon makes a crescent-moon incision
across the top, pulls back the tissue, drills a hole through either side
of your skull and uses an insulated stylus, metal tip the size of the
ball of a ballpoint pen, to burn two mirror-imaged spheres the size
of sugar cubes in your brain tissue.
If you try everything and nothing works—not neurotransmitter
reuptake inhibitors, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, mood stabilizers,
anticonvulsants, antipsychotics, psychotherapy, repetitive trans­
cranial magnetic stimulation or electroconvulsive therapy—you
may qualify for what is called an anterior cingulotomy. The surgery,
pioneered in the 1950s and ’60s in the shadow of the lobotomy—the
Nobel-winning procedure involving an ice pick through your eye

116

Anna Mehler Paperny

socket to scramble your frontal lobe, frequently performed on men
and women (mostly women) without anything resembling consent and with often devastating results—involves toasting two
spheres of brain tissue about a centimeter in diameter.
I contacted Darin Dougherty—a psychiatrist at Massachusetts
General, still the only hospital in the US that performs these surgeries for mental illness—to find out more about the procedure.
He was friendly and encouraging of my desire to learn more than
the nothing I knew about brain surgery.
In the wake of what he calls “the frontal lobotomy debacle,” the
neurosurgery community was seeking a more precise way to slice
into the brains of people with mental illness. Neurosurgeons didn’t
know where to start so they picked a spot at random. “The idea was
to move from these big, indiscriminate lesions . . . to small, targeted,
discriminate lesions,” Darin Dougherty explains to me.8 Apparently
we still don’t know how it works, though, or why we target the forward-facing inner fold of brain called the dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex, or what that cortex does. But we do know it’s part of the network that’s involved in depression. “Remember this procedure was
started in the ’60s . . . and it just happened to be effective.”
Similar surgeries were being pioneered at a few sites worldwide
around the same time. But some guesses were less lucky. “In Germany
they did things like excise part of your grey cortical matter on the
brain surface. Yeah, they would just take cortex away, and that wasn’t
effective,” he says. You had dozens of people in the mid-twentieth
century who volunteered for an experimental craniotomy to treat
their intractable depression only to be left with two holes in their
heads, still mired in despondency. “Can you imagine?”
The trouble with these invasive procedures: You can’t do a randomized controlled trial on a brain surgery procedure. The control would require a fake skull-drilling, brain-tissue-burning
operation. All you can do is track what happens to the patients
who get it. And the evidence so far shows that the cingulotomy
that surgeons stuck with, that toasts two little spheres of your

Zapping, Shocking, and Burning Your Brain into Submission

117

brain, still works better than almost anything for people for whom
nothing else works.9
What’s involved in an anterior cingulotomy? You come to the
hospital. You get an MRI “so we know exactly where we’re going.”
You get local anesthetic lidocaine in your scalp, then a frame—the
kind that looks like metal scaffolding and is used for people with
vertebral fractures—screwed through the skin till it touches bone
so as to keep your skull stable. Maybe also a benzo like midazolam
for anxiety.
Then you get a high-res CAT scan and technicians overlay it
on the MRI to give themselves a visual of where they want to go.
“It’s basically three-dimensional space geometry stuff.” They bring
you into the operating room and screw your metal-scaffolding
frame to the bed so you can’t move your head at all. The surgeon
slices through your scalp, one incision spanning the desired locations of both holes, which will straddle either side of the front-ish
part of your head. “If you drew horns on somebody, that’s where
they’d be coming out,” is how Dougherty describes it to me. A precision drill bores a hole into your skull, through the protective
swim-cap-like dura, until it just reaches (but doesn’t pierce) your
brain. “The drill is foolproof: It’s designed to do this,” he reassures
me. “You don’t want an ‘oops, I pushed too hard.’”
And then?
“Well, then you’ve got a hole.”
The surgeon takes the metal probe programmed with the exact
coordinates of the spherical hole they want to burn in your brain.
Based on the imaging, they push the probe down as far as indicated
and lock it in place. Then, they turn the probe on. The probe itself is
insulated except for the tip, which heats up to about 185 to 190 degrees
Fahrenheit. The surgeon leaves it in place for about sixty seconds,
and voilà. Your lesion. Then you can take it out and do the other side.
“And then you just sew them up and that’s it.”
See? Easy. It’s about an hour, start to finish. You’re home within
forty-eight. You end up with mirrored balls burned into your brain.

118

Anna Mehler Paperny

I ask if they’ve ever tried just doing one side. “It’d be interesting to
study,” he muses. “The problem is, if you picked the wrong side and
you need both, you’d have to do two brain surgeries instead of one.
So we’ve never really explored it.”
He doesn’t do the surgery himself: He’s a psychiatrist, not a surgeon. After the hole’s bored in your skull but before your tissue’s
burned, he and his team are doing research with your informed consent to see what’s going on neurocircuitry-wise when you perform
different tasks.
While they’re in there, they can measure single neurons firing
during specific tasks. They take electrodes the size of a human hair
and insert them in the same place they’re going to burn later.
If you really want to zero in on a neuron, you’ve got to listen for it.
“You can hear the crackle of a neuron—we always have the
volume up. That’s the best way to identify it.” (Yes, that crackle’s basically the same sound as Rice Krispies cereal.) “That’s when you know
you’ve found a neuron—the noise the electron firing makes; that
crackle that you hear is an action potential or a firing.” That crackle
means the neuron is sending a message—making a connection, issuing instructions. He and his colleagues are listening for changes in
the crackling pattern and how your brain is responding, then they
chart those noises. “The sound is converted to a curve that we can
draw and then we do quantitative evaluation of that curve, measurements and math and that kind of stuff.”
You go through computerized tasks, keyboard placed for ease
of use while you lie on the operating table. They measure your
attention, and what happens when they try to distract you; they’ll
get you to do gambling tasks and see how your brain responds
when you make decisions, when you win or lose. Dougherty and
his team are less interested in how you actually do at those tasks
than what your brain is doing while you do them—how you make
the decision. “Because some people are presented with a high risk
and they’re like, ‘I’m going to bet low so I don’t lose as much.’ And
some people are like, ‘I’m betting high all the time.’ . . . And then

Zapping, Shocking, and Burning Your Brain into Submission

119

when you hear whether you’ve won or lost, people respond differently, and their brain responds differently. And so we’re interested
in what happens at different points all the way along.”
You can’t compare brain activity before and after the procedure,
because the bits you’ve toasted are no longer doing anything.
About three-quarters of patients who undergo anterior cingulotomy improve within about six to twelve months. This is a good
response rate, as far as depression treatments go. Dougherty says
there’s no evidence it impairs your cognitive functioning.
But you’ve still gotta keep taking your meds.
“The worst thing that can happen is a patient thinking, ‘Oh, I’ve
had the procedure; I don’t need to take the medication anymore.”
The relapse rate is “low, but not zero.” About 10 to 20 percent of
people who got better following treatment will lose either some or
all of the improvement. (Going all the way back to square one is
pretty rare, though.) If you relapse or don’t respond in the first place,
if you’re in that unlucky 25 percent that doesn’t get better after
having bits of brain burned away, you can come back for a sub­
caudate tractotomy—that’s basically the same procedure in a different location, toward the lower portion of the brain.
(“Yeah, I know there are a lot of -otomies out there,” Dougherty
says when I butcher all these terms yet again. “You’re doing great.”
You can thank me when this comes up at your pub’s next trivia
night.)
As with almost every depression treatment right now, you don’t
know whether burning holes in your brain will alleviate your depression until you try it.
Mass General does two to six of these surgeries for depression
a year. To be eligible you’ve got to have exhausted all other treatments, but Dougherty figures it’s hugely underused. Many patients
and doctors aren’t aware it exists as an option. The sordid history
of lobotomies doesn’t help, though he assures me again that “this
couldn’t be more different than what was done in the past.” Sure, I
guess. Although knowing the area surgeons target was originally

120

Anna Mehler Paperny

chosen at random—even though they’re uber-precise about it
now—is understandably freaky.

So the gold standard for depression treatment is a combination
of psychotherapy—whose clinical effectiveness is seldom regulated—and a handful of meds that have gotten more tolerable but no
more effective in the five decades since their antecedents were discovered by accident. When that doesn’t work, the best fallback is a
memory-thieving controlled cranial seizure that terrorized asylum
patients seventy-odd years ago. The only once-popular treatments
we’ve abandoned completely are insulin comas and the lobotomy.
Even hyperthermia may be coming back into vogue.10 Therapeutic
saunas for everyone.
It’s worrying, destabilizing, irrationally guilt-inducing to know
you’re running out of options for the thing ruining your life. On top
of everything else I began to feel like a failure at treating my own
depression. Was I taking these pills wrong in some way? Was I fundamentally metabolically flawed? It didn’t help that there seemed so
little method to the madness of drug selection: I was on lithium,
despite my lack of mania, then off it, then back on four years later;
we tried half a dozen different serotonin, norepinephrine, dopamine
reuptake inhibitors. Antipsychotics; an anxiolytic; an anticonvulsant. So many cognitive behavioral therapy thought records I could
do them in my sleep. I did thought records for thoughts I hadn’t even
had yet. I followed every directive, but despite myself lost hope in
the prospect of a future free of paralytic despair.
We keep smacking up against the limitations of existing options.
Our approach to the brain, the methodology underlying every existing approved treatment for depression, has all the sophistication of
apes poking a Space Odyssey monolith. Which leaves us fumbling in
the dark to comprehend a disease that’s been on society’s radar for
centuries, and to get people in the grips of one of the single biggest
public health burdens in the world into treatment that works.

14
Brainiacs
A pickled brain is cartoonishly brainy. Like opening up someone’s
chest to find a pulsing fuchsia emoji heart. It feels sea-creature slippery to the touch. Firmer, less spongy than you’d expect for a bodily
organ. Its bloodless putty-colored maze of bulgy folds and creases
is mesmerizing but it’s clear the thing I’m holding is an inert facsimile of a human’s multibillion-celled control center.
I don’t know anything about science or medicine but if I was going
to learn everything I could about this enemy, my illness, I knew I
would have to go to the brainiac epicenters. So I went to the National
Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Human Brain Collection Core
in Bethesda, Maryland—one of the most major brain banks out
there—to hold, with gloved hands, pieces of pickled brain and answer
a fundamental question: What can you learn from a dead brain?
The formalin solution reeks of sour yogurt and liquefied rubber.
Don’t splash it on your clothes or skin. Latex gloves are mandatory.
It’s getting rarer to pickle a brain this way: Pickling degrades RNA,
the ribonucleic acid you need to tease out epigenetic abnormalities.
But formalin fixing is good for preserving cells’ physical integrity, if
you’re into counting neurons’ starfish-armed dendrites to get a sense
of the organ’s multitudinous connections. Flash-freezing a brain
makes cell contents expand and burst through cell membranes the
way forgetting your wine in the freezer makes it expand and burst

122

Anna Mehler Paperny

through glass bottles. So sometimes you pickle and sometimes you
freeze, depending what your plans are for this brain.
I discover the bulgy folds are gyri; the grey creases, sulci. While
in your skull, your brain’s encased in that protective vein-mottled
swim cap of a dura, but you generally peel this off early in the dissection process.
Sliding gloved fingers over gyri, peering at brain bits on a wheeled
table, I felt like a mad scientist. I also felt hungry: Coronal slices look
like cauliflower cut stemwise.
The most important parts of brain analysis are way less sexy-­
looking to the layperson. You break each pertinent flash-frozen
section into tiny fragments—sometimes through pulverizing but
often by sending it to precision labs that’ll isolate individual cells.
“If your question is how this particular cell expresses its particular
genes, [pulverizing] is not the best method,” Barbara Lipska warns
me.1 Trust her: As the Human Brain Collection Core director, she
knows. A small (but taller than me) and quietly fierce woman with
short hair she wears under a kerchief-bandana—she is in remission
for brain cancer, an against-the-odds battle she won and whose scars
she’s written a book about2—she ushers me through her lab and
shows me how it’s done. You extract minuscule pieces and ship them
out in tiny vials to researchers around the world. You use a microtome—like the world’s coldest, priciest, precisest prosciutto slicer—
to cut vanishingly thin translucent postage-stamp sections of brain
you can then mount on a slide for staining or microscopy.
One of the toughest jobs at a brain bank is the ask. Way before
tissue hits pre-cooled metal, before the brain enters the lab to be
cryoprotected, frozen, dissected, analyzed, someone needs to
phone grieving families in the hours immediately after their loved
one has died and ask them to donate their next-of-kin’s brain to
science. I do a lot of awkward cold calls, but this one would be
especially tough.
I find Jonathan Sirovatka in his tiny office, retro by comparison
to the bank of computers in the adjoining lab used to search and sort

Brainiacs

123

thousands of brain samples by dozens of variables. He’s introduced
to me as an expert medical lab technician but he wields expertise
in all parts of the brain acquisition process and has permutations
of his script pinned to the wall and shelf space near the desk phone.
Here, every morning, he talks to medical examiners—the trained
professionals who perform postmortems. They call him or he calls
them and they tell him what they’ve got.
“The investigators read me the circumstances of death, the history of the person, and I make a snap judgment based upon what I
hear, whether they’d be a good candidate. And most are not good
candidates.” 3
You can’t accept just any brain for research. Any number of
maladies and medical mishaps can render brains unusable. They
are so heterogeneous even within diagnoses, labs do their best to
limit as many confounding factors as they can.
And of course, you want it fresh. Generally, you don’t want a brain
from someone who’s been dead for seventy-two hours or more. But
everyone decomposes differently.
“Let’s say a person was shot in a Washington alley and was lying
there for ten hours in the middle of the summer, a hundred degrees,”
Barbara Lipska tells me as we sit in her office down the hall from
super-cooled ice chests full of brains. “Another person is shot in the
same alley in the winter and fell into the snow headfirst. Which
brain would be better for us to do molecular studies? Obviously, the
second one.”
Between 10 and 20 percent of the cases that Jonathan Sirovatka
gets from medical examiners meet those standards. Then comes the
hard part. About three-quarters of people shut him down a couple
of paragraphs into his script. Right around the bit about asking for
the organ underpinning their deceased loved one’s consciousness.
“Most families are in shock: It’s usually within twenty-four
hours of the death,” he says. “I get all ranges of reactions. Most
people—I’d say 85, 90 percent—are polite. . . . But on occasion I
get cursed at and yelled at and hung up on. ‘How dare you be

124

Anna Mehler Paperny

calling me at this time?’ ‘I’m grieving.’ ‘You need to have respect:
I’m trying to lay my loved one to rest and you’re asking for a piece
of them? How dare you.’”
He isn’t supposed to take a side. He can’t cajole people into contributing to what could be life-altering research for people they’ll
never meet, who may not yet be born.
The next of kin has about two hours to decide. Sometimes less.
If they say yes, they go through a recorded conversation confirming
they’re making the donation decision freely, knowing they get no
direct benefit and that all identifying information will be kept confidential. Then Jonathan Sirovatka drives in a government vehicle
to the medical examiner’s office to transport the brain in a plastic
bag inside an ice-laden insulated soft-sided cooler you’d use for a
picnic or a six-pack. He’s never been pulled over or been in an accident but brings a document authorizing him to transport organs
across state lines, just in case. The brain’s on NIMH’s campus ready
for dissection six hours after that initial call to the medical examiner’s office. Sometimes sooner. And then you dissect.
The instruments look deceptively simple: a scalpel; a longish rectangular knife; tongs used primarily for handling the colder-than-ice
tray that holds specimen sections. They slice the brain into forty-five
meticulously cut pieces, dab them with a tissue to remove most of
the blood and take a series of organ mugshots from front, back, side
angles. They note any abnormalities before the pieces go into fortyfive marker-labeled, bar-coded, resealable plastic bags like cascading
sizes of ziplocks that are then secreted in huge high-tech chest freezers kept somewhere between -165 and -176 degrees Fahrenheit.
It’s a little traumatizing at first, Sirovatka says. He was sixteen
the first time he walked into a brain dissection and the supervisor
said, “Come on over, look at this. We have a beautiful brain here.”
There is such a thing as becoming blasé, he says. So straddling the
emotional family side and the clinical dissection side helps him
remember these masses of tissue were vital parts of human beings.
Before he started making the donation-request phone calls, it was

Brainiacs

125

easier to forget the things he was dissecting had belonged to a person.
“I was starting to have this disconnect. Now I’m speaking to the
families. . . . I was speaking to a father about his son and I was telling him about what he would be asked in the medical questionnaire
and he said, ‘Yeah, we’re happy to do that, but there’s one thing you’re
not going to get from any of the medical records that I want you to
know: He was extremely loved.’”
Melanie Bose needs no reminder of the personal side of brain
donation: She convinced her dying dad to donate his.
She was visiting him in Arizona when the issue came up. He was
going to refuse, partly on religious grounds. She dug up rabbinic
teachings that it’s justified to save another’s life. “And I also said,
‘Dad, you’re going to be dead. You’re not going to know about it.’”
He laughed. He consented.4
Melanie Bose isn’t tasked with convincing families to donate
dead loved ones’ brains. She’s the one who does the detective work
immediately afterward, calling relatives and friends and doctors to
put together a detailed profile of a donor’s life and mental health in
the weeks, months, years before death. The quality of medical
records is variable. Health care providers are starting to enter the
late-­t wentieth century but most of what Melanie Bose gets is still
handwritten and sloppily copied. Their level of illegibility sometimes
necessitates a magnifying glass. And lack of detail can be especially
annoying. Hallucinations? Visual or auditory? Inside the head, or
outside? Who were the voices, what were they saying?
Things can get even more confusing if the individual’s psychiatric history includes a stack of conflicting medical records. If you saw
four different psychiatrists over the course of your life and got four
different diagnoses, it’s up to Melanie Bose and the psychiatrists
she works with to figure out into which diagnostic category to place
the brain. This is not a trivial thing: Brain research relies on big
cohorts—unipolar depression specimens versus bipolar depression
specimens versus control specimens—whose clear-cut definitions
belie their inherent fuzziness. These postmortem categorizations,

126

Anna Mehler Paperny

retroactively assessing other people’s assessments of your symptoms, show how arbitrary—and often speculative—our psychiatric
classifications can be.

Individual human br ains are so wildly different from each
other in so many ways—the relevance of which we’re ages away from
fully understanding—that it’s still impossible to tell, looking at individual brains, which one had a mood disorder. Three brains of people
diagnosed with the same disease will look completely different; three
brains from people who’ve never experienced any mental illness will
look completely different—how do you figure out what similarities
the sick brains share that differentiate them from the well ones? In
science, sample size matters: THe people dedicating their waking
hours to teasing out the phenotypic, neurobiological, epigenetic variations between different diagnostic categories of tissue rely on huge
numbers to drown out the noise. You need analyses of hundreds or
thousands of brains grouped by diagnosis and you need to use the
sum of your findings to draw general conclusions. Doable, mostly.
Or it would be, if the boundaries between categories weren’t so fuzzy.
“The groups are so ill-defined. . . . This is one of the problems: We
don’t know how to categorize these illnesses,” Barbara Lipska, who
so generously allowed me to explore her brain bank, bemoans. “And
if you can’t, then what is left?”
Since 2015, NIMH has been focusing more on symptoms and
behavior. That means zeroing in on hallucinations, suicidality, mania,
for example, instead of whatever disease category a cluster of symptoms fits into. But it’s tough to measure behavioral symptoms from
dead brains.
The molecular biology she practices didn’t even exist for brains
until very recently: Researchers mostly stuck to brains that were
still alive so they could see what happened when you poked them
or sliced apart big hunks of grey matter. Informed consent wasn’t
much of a thing back then, so you had living human experiments

Brainiacs

127

like Patient H. M., the now-infamous man who lost his memory
when a celebrated neurosurgeon with a lackadaisical approach to
ethics hacked a chunk out of his hippocampus.5 And even then, it
was tough to link action to consequence or do anything more than
guess causation. The brain is too complicated.
We’re only beginning to develop tools that allow us to inspect the
brain at the level where biochemical differentiations are actually happening. RNA sequencing is one of them—it entails lining up long
series of numbers and looking for patterns. Barbara Lipska and her
team have been, among other things, sequencing RNA to see how
the transcriptions of certain genes vary in different mental disorders.6
It’s “like a signature. It’s like a code,” she says. “It’s breaking a code.”
I went to see her fellow code-breaker Maree Webster, who heads
a brain research laboratory at the Stanley Medical Research Institute
just a couple of miles away from NIMH, in Kensington, Maryland.
Originally from Australia, she used to work at NIMH with Barbara
Lipska; now she runs her own show, a 680-brain lab that got so full
she had to stop accepting new specimens.
In addition to conducting studies designed to replicate and verify
what partners around the world are finding, Webster’s team is also
researching human neurodevelopment, tracking what proteins play
key roles in infant maturation and comparing development in various groups of brains in the hopes of pinpointing the places where
people with mental illnesses diverge from healthy controls.
It takes a lot of work, energy, and money to keep hundreds of
brains preserved indefinitely. Maree Webster’s lab has fifty-five
hulking chest freezers. She sighs. “So rent and the electricity alone
cost a fortune.” 7 I get to watch a technician using frozen cordite to
slice a translucent tissue-thin sample of striatum, a cluster of neurons and critical component of motor and reward systems, fragile
as a pressed butterfly wing or a scrap of skin peeling off a bad burn.
Elsewhere in the lab the tiny tip of a minuscule tube is designed to
dip hummingbird-like into a frozen tissue sample and emerge with
microgram-sized fragments of brain.

128

Anna Mehler Paperny

Both Barbara Lipska’s lab and Maree Webster’s send tissue to
researchers all over the world. Tissue packages from Webster’s lab
usually go by FedEx, in dry ice. The lab takes requests on the brain
part and manner of preservation. A key condition: You have to send
the results of your test back to her lab. Her staff have coded all the
samples, and only they know which ones are control—specimens
from people who had no mental illnesses—and which are not. This
means Webster’s brain bank has all the data from all the studies done
with all the tissue of all the brains in the bank.
It’s a full-time job just ensuring everything makes it through
customs OK.
The striatum I get to watch being meticulously prosciutto sliced
is destined for Australia, about a two-day journey away. “Australia’s
really a pain because they’re an island and they don’t want any biological things going in and out,” Maree Webster says. “Others are
more worried about terrorism. I mean, Israel doesn’t like dry ice
going in.” You can send brain tissue to picky countries, “but you have
to go through a lot more rigmarole. They’ll take it as long as you do
all the right paperwork.”
Barbara Lipska knows better than to believe any brain-science
hype—the breathless headlines trumpeting a discovery that will revolutionize the field. Even if it’s her own. “I’ve seen a lot of papers and
studies that have been done very quickly and on very small numbers
of subjects to just get published. . . . I call it scientific pollution.” The
replication everyone’s after is nearly impossible to achieve and just
as hard to define, especially in psychiatric studies: THere are too
many squishy variables at play.
For all this frustrating uncertainty, for all the limitations of baby
steps you aren’t even sure are in the right direction until a bunch of
other people have taken those same steps, she seems to me remarkably zen. And quite certain: “I absolutely think [depression] is a
disease of the brain based on neurobiological dysfunction. . . . On
a neurobiological basis, something is not working.”
∙∙∙

Brainiacs

129

The next br ains I seek out are in Canada. I head north of the
border to Quebec, where Gustavo Turecki probes preserved brains—
some flash-frozen and some pickled—in Montreal’s Douglas Mental
Health University Institute. He’s focused on tracking strands of
RNA and comparing differences between people who are sick and
who are well; people who killed themselves who suffered childhood
trauma and those who killed themselves and did not.
Gustavo Turecki acquired his own brain bank almost by happy
accident: He wanted to work with colleagues who had a small collection of brains, maybe a dozen, from people who’d killed themselves,
which they were planning to study for biochemical research. A commercial deal fell through, the colleagues who’d owned the brain bank
went on to do other things—and he had a collection on his hands.
Now his Montreal bank boasts about three thousand brains. Brains
of people who’ve killed themselves, of people who’ve had Parkinson’s
or Alzheimer’s, and of controls who had none of those.8
Turecki decided to zero in on suicide because it struck him as
an urgent problem that remained maddeningly intractable. “Suicide
is a fascinating issue, from a clinical point of view; not only because
it’s the only condition of psychiatry that is lethal . . . it’s difficult to
understand. And this is what we all try to prevent constantly, yet
we have no objective means of doing so.” He is sitting across from
me in his office, a glass coffee table between us and the grassy campus
quad in west Montreal outside the window. It’s August and I can
taste the warmth behind the air conditioning and in the dust motes
at the window. As recently as the 1990s, he says, the mere suggestion
there could be biological underpinnings to self-obliteration was
anathema. “There were some people that were in shock to think
you could study the biology of suicide. They were viscerally against
it. . . . They [would say] it’s reductionistic to think that suicide is
something happening in the brain. They think that it’s social. But
the issue is that it’s not one or the other. If you are very sad, to the
point that you can’t see any way out, so that you’re so severely hopeless that everything in reality changes from how it was before, it is

130

Anna Mehler Paperny

in your brain. . . . We don’t know exactly where it’s broken, but we
know it’s broken.”
That brokenness is what Gustavo Turecki and his colleagues are
looking for. They haven’t found it yet. In many ways they don’t really
know what they’re chasing or how to go about chasing it. But for now
he’s banking on epigenetics.
Futuristic gene editing notwithstanding, your DNA doesn’t
change: THe blueprint you’re born with is the blueprint you keep as
you mature, age, and die. What does change is the way that blueprint’s interpreted. Your RNA acts as messenger, translator, photocopier. Different forms of RNA tell every cell in your body what to
do and when to do it. Their instructions differ depending what’s
going on in your life. That’s epigenetics. It means “on top of,” or
“above,” genetics, and it’s become an increasingly sexy field in our
efforts to explain things not revealed by genetics alone.
Gustavo Turecki thinks the secret to suicidality lies in epigenetics. The way your RNA uses some instructions but not others,
if it transcribes some genes too much or too little, is implicated in
your mood disorder. That doesn’t imply causation. But just being
able to differentiate between the genetic interpretation of a depressed
or suicidal person and the genetic interpretation of a healthy person
would be huge.
How can inspecting a dead brain give you insights into what was
going on when it was alive?
He characterizes the dead brain as more like a fossil fixed in time
than a computer gone irretrievably dark, taking its hard drive and
activity with it. “Dead,” he says, “means, basically, the book was left
open at one particular time, on one particular page. So you can read
what was going on at that particular time when the person died.”
In his lab I barge in on a young woman extracting RNA proteins
from tiny snatches of different brains to compare their activity levels
and check any changes in the transcription rate of particular genes.
She introduces herself as Meghan. “The brain is flash-frozen, so
we’re hoping the proteins will still be active,” she murmurs. If she’s

Brainiacs

131

annoyed at my barging she doesn’t show it, and seems happy to
explain to me what she’s doing. Meghan takes about twenty milligrams of brain tissue, puts it into a tiny tube and grinds it up until
“it becomes a brain pulp, in a sense.” Add some buffers, spin it down,
boom: isolated protein at the bottom.
Turecki has seen pathophysiological distinctions at play, he says,
in the brains of people who’ve been through childhood trauma. They
have trouble regulating their emotions, dealing with what others
would encounter as everyday adversity. And there’s molecular evidence of that—fewer hippocampus receptors that detect levels of
the stress hormone cortisol, which hampers what’s supposed to be
a negative feedback loop. So your fight-or-flight mode never switches
off. “Which is, if you think about it, an adaptive mechanism for
someone who was exposed to adversity. . . . The message these people
get is that the environment is sort of unreliable. So they cannot sort
of be quiet and rest and relax because they never know when they’re
going to get it. . . . [The mechanism] becomes maladaptive.”
Brains are intensely, mind-meltingly complicated. To the point
that we’re only just beginning to comprehend their complexity, much
less alter their functioning with precision. Even knowing the way
trauma is expressed epigenetically has done little to change clinical
practice. I am bad at delayed gratification and for all our huge
advances the future of mental health care still seems decades down
the road behind the doors of these labs, stacked frozen or placed
pickled in high-tech freezers.
What is there for those of us unwilling or unable to wait?

15
A Dry Pharma Pipeline
Much to the chagrin of anyone stuck on a crazy medication merrygo-round, there’s not much new in the pharma pipeline.
It’s psychiatry’s curse of serendipity: THe major breakthroughs
on which virtually all pharmacologic depression treatment is based
were lucky flukes, stumbled upon while scientists were trying to fix
something else.
Iproniazid didn’t cure tuberculosis, as researchers of the early
1950s hoped it would. But doctors noticed that it did make depressed
tubercular patients a lot happier. Eventually researchers figured out
that iproniazid was disrupting the work of an enzymatic system
called monoamine oxidase (remember that guy?), whose job normally involves breaking down neurotransmitters that could then
spend more time bouncing around, available. This was around the
same time physicians figured out that monoamine oxidase is present
just about everywhere in the body, and inhibiting it in the brain
meant inhibiting all the other stuff it’s supposed to do. This is a recurring theme: Pharmacological treatment of mental disorders has all
the precision of surgery conducted with a chainsaw.
Imipramine, a couple of generations removed from a failed
­n ineteenth-century textile dye, was used as an experimental treatment for psychotic patients in a Swiss clinic. It didn’t fix anyone’s
psychosis. But it turned out to be a wicked antidepressant—one

A Dry Pharma Pipeline

133

that launched a thousand copycat drugs and a $20 billion antidepressant industry.1
Decades of R&D followed, replicating the same couple of lucky
breaks. But treatment development is running out of pixie dust.
Steven Hyman attributes the half century of less-than-innovative,
extremely lucrative psychiatric pharmaceutical creation to “the false
hope created by the first serendipitous discoveries.” 2
Steven Hyman heads the Harvard-MIT Broad Institute’s Stanley
Center for Psychiatric Research, is a former Harvard provost and
former head of the National Institute of Mental Health. He was
among the first people I talked to after embarking on this harebrained
project. At first, he tells me by phone, everyone thought “these drugs
would just be the beginning—that if you reverse-engineered what the
drugs were doing, they would teach us about the mechanism of depression. And that kind of giddy hope wasn’t really out of place in the
1950s.”
Things didn’t work out that way.
Instead, pharma companies spent decades developing “me-too”
drugs—drugs with near-identical mechanisms of action as other
drugs but with a small change allowing for a lucrative patent—
based on those initial lucky breaks, using the original drugs’ medical mechanisms as starting points to such a degree that initial
animal tests for antidepressants were designed and evaluated based
on whether the drug acted like existing antidepressants, not whether
it actually quelled depressive symptoms. The drugs they created
became more tolerable in terms of side effects and less dangerous
in case of overdose, which is a plus when you’re prescribing them
to seriously serially suicidal patients like me. But they never got any
better at doing what they were supposed to do: alleviate depression.3
If anything, the early flukes gave way to a skewed understanding
of the disease itself: the idea that depression must be caused by some
kind of neurotransmitter imbalance—wonky levels of the chemical
messengers that regulate mood, among other things.

134

Anna Mehler Paperny

We know now it’s far more complicated. And we’re nowhere close
to breakthroughs in terms of how depression actually works. While
even cancer lets you take a biopsy and peer closely at a small slice of
tumor, good luck hacking off a chunk of someone’s brain. And even
if you could, it wouldn’t help. Whatever’s messing with your brain
isn’t confined to one small fold of grey matter, a single snip of neurons. The screwup involves a multifactorial maze within an organ
we haven’t begun to understand.
Drug R&D probably would have continued churning out nearidentical versions of the same 1950s discoveries if buyers and regulators hadn’t wised up and started requiring new psychiatric drugs
to actually be demonstrably better than what was out there. Europe
made the first move in 2013 , requiring all new drugs for treatmentresistant depression to perform not only better than placebos, but
better than existing, pharmacologically similar drugs already on
the market.4 Why didn’t this happen earlier? “Payers were dumb,”
Hyman says, then corrects himself. “That’s not a nice thing to say.
It’s because marketing works. But the payers really should have
known better.” And once the rules changed, the party was over.
“I think that really, in some ways, started the exit. . . . There are still
a few companies who are in this business but most of them, even the
ones that still have a reasonable number of projects . . . are actually
investing much less money per project.” 5
Truth is, pharma companies don’t know how to make new and
more efficacious depression meds because nobody does. And it’s
hard to make money when you don’t know how your secret ingredients work.
So, many are getting out of the biz and closing psychiatric R&D
units altogether: Research and development is expensive and slow;
the availability of animal subjects with brains similar to humans
essentially nonexistent; the metrics of success increasingly slippery
and tough to quantify. Any real, profit-making progress is a decade
away. GlaxoSmithKline closed its neuroscience research facility in
2010, as did AstraZeneca; Novartis shuttered its brain research

A Dry Pharma Pipeline

135

facility in 2011. “Progress based on neurotransmitters has become
small and incremental,” Mark Fishman, then president of the
Novartis Institutes of BioMedical Research, told Nature at the time.6
Pfizer, Merck, and Sanofi also retrenched their research and development in psychiatric drugs around the same time.7
Richard Friedman, the director of psychopharmacology at
Weill Cornell Medicine in New York, recommended to me by
Andrew Solomon, paints the same picture. “In the last couple of
years [pharmaceutical companies] have really begun to shut down,
if not totally shut down, their brain research science, because developing psychotropic drugs is extremely risky, expensive, unlikely to
yield effective agents for all kinds of complicated reasons. So the
drug companies play it safe. . . . It’s not that it happened suddenly—
it’s a drip, drip, drip. But it’s been going on for quite a while and they
decided to cut their losses.” After doing the same thing for so long
with so few new insights or results, “developing a new compound
with a new target is daunting.” 8
And, he adds, “Behavioral measurements, while they can be valid
and reliable, to a lot of people are ‘squishy.’” Uncertainty-averse
people in the business of making money are not fans of measures
that require someone to tell you about the kinds of deep-seated emotions and soul-destroying self-conceptions the patient has spent ages
trying to suppress or hide or ignore.
OK, but what do pharma companies themselves have to say about
this neglected and unattractive field? I reached out to some of the
biggest players to get their takes on why depression gets no love.
Lilly, maker of Prozac, the drug that’s become synonymous with
depression pharmacotherapy, as well as big-name newbies such as
Cymbalta, declined my request to chat. “Thank you for reaching out
to us. We’re not able to grant an interview at this time, but I know
there are many external resources on this subject. You can also visit
Lilly.com for a timeline of discoveries if that’s helpful,” Lilly’s spokesperson wrote in an email.9

136

Anna Mehler Paperny

Pfizer, maker of Effexor and Zoloft, the latter one of the most
popular drugs in the United States as recently as 2013 and whose
generic version I popped for years, did not want to be interviewed
either. “That is not an area of focus for us now. Thanks for the offer,
but we’ll pass,” a spokesman wrote back.10
Sanofi declined to speak with me when I asked, because “treatment of depression and suicide is not an area Sanofi concentrates
[its] efforts.” 11 Ditto Merck. “Depression is not an area that Merck
currently has compounds in development, per our corporate pipeline chart. I would refer you to others in the field involved in this
area of research.” 12
Allergan, which is one of the few major companies making
new depression treatments, initially responded to an email request
for an interview but then, when I followed up, did not get back
to me. 13
“If you are the CEO of a drug company and your job depends
on your revenue and your profits,” Steven Hyman points out, “it’s
pretty obvious the brain seems too hard, too risky. . . . I was trying
to convince . . . some companies to stay involved with schizophrenia, and the head of discovery said, ‘Look—this might help my successor’s successor, but how will it help me?’” 14
The pharmaceutical industry’s commercial imperatives are not
kind to depression drug research. Shareholders know that. “They
look at the portfolio of the company,” says Ken Kaitin, head of the
Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development, who I turned to
for clarity in sorting out why there’s so little new on the depression
treatment horizon, “and if they see the company is focusing on
antidepressants, they’re going to say, ‘Sell. I don’t want this stock
anymore, because I’m not interested in a company that’s developing drugs that are not going to be big sellers.’” 15
The smart pharma money right now is on cancer: Cancer is way
ahead and advancing faster; there are actual genes to target. Huge
public support has been tremendously effective in raising money and
awareness. And new cancer drugs can command a very high price.

A Dry Pharma Pipeline

137

The one thing depression drugs have going for them is market
potential: THere’s a big unmet need, and a higher disease burden,
overall, than for cancer. But need is not enough—the millions of
people who will buy your novel new depression drug for years, if not
decades, are not themselves adequate incentive for anyone to want
to invest the time and money required to make that drug.
When it comes to drug research the deck is stacked against psychiatric conditions in general and depression in particular, Ken
Kaitin says. To drive pharmaceutical R&D in a particular disease
area you need scientific knowledge, an economic environment that
makes for a strong business case, a market demand and a risk level
that allows you a degree of confidence that your new compound is
going to succeed, and depression drugs face a real challenge in all
those areas. “Bottom line is, the competitive landscape, scientific
knowledge and technical risks, all those negatives outweigh the
positives of a positive market environment.” And prospective psych
drugs take longer to go through clinical testing than others—about
nine years, on average, compared to five or six. That means added
hassle and cost but it also shortens the amount of time you have
exclusive dibs on the product. And that’s assuming you get approval.
Psych drugs fail at a higher rate than any other drug type out there,
he says—their success rate is about half the industry average.
Richard Friedman argues it’s time to rip up the existing model
for depression drug development and start over. Instead of waiting
for pharma companies to come up with something fun and new, he
would like to see publicly subsidized researchers identify novel compounds and take those to corporations to turn them into marketable drugs. But not everyone is on board: Ken Kaitin is skeptical
about getting government and other publicly funded bodies too
deeply involved in what he sees as commercial drug development.
He’d like to see multiparty partnerships whose aim is to devise new
treatments for conditions where the public interest in breakthroughs
outweighs the private-sector appetite for risk. There’s a multiparty
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative in Japan, Australia,

138

Anna Mehler Paperny

and Brazil. And America’s National Institutes of Health has started
an accelerated medicines partnership targeting drugs to treat lupus,
rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, and Alzheimer’s.
None of this exists for depression.
“The emotional toll,” Kaitin says, “of something like Alzheimer’s
disease or cancer, that drives a lot of passion. And it drives a lot of
fear among people [which] they fall prey to. You don’t see that in
areas like depression.
“For lack of a better word, it’s not sexy in the same way.”
Fact-check: true. Depression is not sexy enough for the spotlight.
A major reason we neglect depression—even more than we neglect
other psychiatric illnesses—is because the most devastating disease
in the world, in terms of total disease burden, lacks that certain je ne
sais quoi.
Governments, at least so far, have not stepped in to match the
cash lost by the private sector’s exit. America’s National Institute of
Mental Health is losing its research capacity;16 Canada’s federal and
provincial governments have made big promises about boosting
funding for brain research but the cash is only beginning to materialize. Mental health research gets one-third the public funding
cancer research gets, despite having, according to the World Health
Organization, a higher burden of disease.17 And even within organizations dedicated to brain research, depression is not a sought-after
subject: Only one of the thirty-two Canada Brain Research Fund
projects awarded in 2014 went to a depression-related initiative—
one focusing on the use of transcranial magnetic stimulation as a
way to treat treatment-resistant depression.18
So cash flow is a major issue. For all the stigma-busting, mental
health boosterism coming from various political circles of late, it’s
empty rhetoric if it doesn’t come with funding attached. One recent
legislative gain in the US was the passing of H. R. 34 (the 21st Century
Cures Act) in 2016, which provided $4.8 billion over ten years to the
National Institutes of Health, including $1.5 billion for the Brain
Research Through Advancing Neurotechnologies (BRAIN)

A Dry Pharma Pipeline

139

Initiative—a project that is pioneering new research to tackle many
brain disorders, including depression. But it’s still not nearly enough.
Anyone waiting for better depression drugs—and (have I mentioned?) there are millions—has a lengthy wait. The prospect of
a breakthrough a decade down the road is galvanizing if you’re a
researcher or health care practitioner dedicating your life to this
stuff. But if you measure profit and growth in quarters rather than
quarter centuries, or if you wake up each morning wishing you
hadn’t, it’s not terribly encouraging.
“We could be lucky,” Steven Hyman says to me in a voice that
suggests you shouldn’t bank on luck. “But actually really novel,
important treatments may be well more than a decade away. Which
is heartbreaking. It’s not hopeless, but it’s hard.”
Like, ten-years-without-fancy-new-meds hard.

16
Old Illness, New Tricks:
The Electrode in Your Brain
So the status quo sucks. We’re dropping the ball when it comes to
coming up with better ways to treat a pernicious condition. But
there are some avenues of inquiry that could provide new tricks for
tackling an old illness.
Helen Mayberg was drawn to psychiatry but not the psychology
part, so she went into neurology, focusing on looking beyond the
neurochemical models that have been our mainstay for decades, to
map the brain circuits involved in depression, incorporating brain
connections with imaging technologies that allow us to read the
brain. She was drawn to depression, she tells me, because she felt
neurology largely ignored it.
Mayberg talks, quietly but firmly, like someone at the forefront
of her field because she is. In her work at Emory University and,
since I spoke with her, in her new gig as founding director of the
Center for Advanced Circuit Therapeutics at the Mount Sinai
Health System in New York, she tries to pinpoint what brain activity abnormalities are present in depressed people and aren’t there
in people who aren’t depressed, how those abnormalities change
in people who get better with treatment, and what differentiates
people who don’t get better on those treatments from those who
do. As technology evolves, researchers have gone from simply

Old Illness, New Tricks: The Electrode in Your Brain

141

observing brain function to intervening in it—seeing what happens
when you stimulate one part versus another in different circumstances in people with different pathologies.
Eventually, Helen Mayberg hopes, you’ll be able to do a brain
scan before starting someone on treatment and use it to decide what
treatment will work best on that person.
“There are people who need therapy and should never go near
a drug: It will not work. And, equally, there are people who need a
drug and it doesn’t matter how badly they want to do it without drugs,
it’s not going to work,” she says. The present trial-and-error modality “is very demoralizing. . . . You have to give people what their brain
needs, period.” 1
She thinks brain imaging and brain stimulation hold the key to
better depression diagnosis, treatment, and treatment selection. But
“everyone has a bias. If you’re a geneticist, you think genetics is the
answer. If you’re a chemist, you think chemistry is the answer. I’m
a neurologist: I think the brain is going to be effective. But I set up
my experiments to prove myself wrong.”
Wonky circuitry’s role in depression notwithstanding, the science of neuroimaging is not nearly as reliable as news coverage of
sci-fi brain scans suggests. In a 2009 study researchers showed an
Atlantic salmon a series of photographs of humans in various social
situations. The salmon was asked to determine what emotion the
person in the photo was experiencing. The salmon was dead. Their
scan returned neural activation results anyway. The falsest of false
positives. The researchers concluded that the likelihood of random
noise giving you misleading results in a scan involving some 130,000
separate bits of information necessitates multiple comparison controls.2 You’ve got to curb your neuroimaging enthusiasm, calculate
the likelihood of noise, and check to make sure the pretty colors
you’re looking at aren’t just dead fish brainwaves.
Over the years, Helen Mayberg’s work studying what’s going on
in the brains of profoundly depressed people led to new ideas about
how to treat people who don’t respond to anything out there. Enter

142

Anna Mehler Paperny

deep brain stimulation (DBS), where you implant electrodes in
someone’s brain and a mini pacemaker below their collarbone. It
isn’t FDA-approved for depression but is already used for Parkinson’s
and extreme cases of treatment-resistant epilepsy. Instead of burning spheres in your brain, as in a cingulotomy, Mayberg pioneered
a method of implanting electrodes in your brain, attaching them
to a battery-powered pulse generator, switching it on, and leaving
it there, in the hopes that the ongoing electrical stimulus will right
whatever’s listing in your brain activity. It had great results and then
it didn’t and researchers are trying to figure out why.
DBS surgery begins in a fashion similar to cingulotomies: with
an MRI. Local lidocaine to numb your scalp. Metal scaffolding
frame affixed to your head, then to the bed once you’re wheeled into
the operating room, so your head, neck, skull are immobile. Another
scan. A precision drill bores holes through your skull, but instead of
the anterior cingulate cortex (that place where your horns, if you had
them, would be), Mayberg’s team threads a pair of tiny electrodes
a bit lower down, into what’s known as Brodmann area 25, which
tends to be too hyperactive in depression.
The tiny electrodes are then connected via spiderweb-thin wires
to a battery-operated implant—a pulse generator—that’s inserted
under your collarbone during a separate surgery.
Mayberg and her colleagues were surprised how quickly it worked
on people for whom it was effective. One of her first patients, having
had that node implanted and turned on the very first time in 2004,
told Mayberg it felt like an Off switch for her depression. That patient
was Deanna Cole-Benjamin, who spoke with me in a Kingston,
Ontario, coffee shop one November morning a dozen years after she
lay in an operating room, smelling and hearing the surgeons drilling
holes through her skull.
“When they’re drilling, it’s noisy,” a cross between a dentist’s drill
and something you’d use for home renovations. “You feel the vibrations and you smell it. Kind of like a burning smell, I guess.” 3
And then she overheard her brain.

Old Illness, New Tricks: The Electrode in Your Brain

143

At first she thought one of the many machines she’d been hooked
up to was malfunctioning. But it was her brain activity expressed
aurally.
“You hear the electricity in your brain, you hear the synapses. It
just sounds like radio static, or a TV station that’s not in tune. Like,
‘chhhhh’ the whole time. . . .
“So that was sort of cool.”
Deanna was in a Toronto operating room, becoming the sixth
person in the world to receive DBS for depression.
She’d spent most of the previous four years living in a Kingston,
Ontario, psychiatric hospital in the grips of a depression that sucked
her under out of the blue one summer. She came to that operating
table borne by desperation: Nothing else had worked. After years of
trial and error and error and error, her doctor called up a colleague
in Toronto who was trying out an invasive new depression treatment.
Would his patient be a good candidate?
It sounded crazy, but if anything, the total foreignness of the
procedure, the lack of any cultural association, positive or negative,
actually made its imagining less scary. “We really felt like we were
coming to the end of a road. . . . We just thought, if there’s an option,
we have to take it.” So there she was, in the operating room, scalp
anesthetized, screws of a stereotactic metal scaffold pinning her head
in place. She remembers a room full of people, the procedure so new
it was spectacle. Surgeons sliced and peeled back a flap of skin, drilled
burr holes through her skull and wove hair-thin flexible filaments,
tips studded with tiny electrodes, into her brain tissue. They turned
on the electrical stimulus, snaked the electrodes into a different
location, turned on the stimulus again—to see how she’d respond
with electrical jolts at different places. Kept asking her questions—
Is it sunny outside?—to ensure her cognitive faculties remained
intact while they tinkered inside her head. With the electrode in one
particular position, Deanna remembers seeing Helen Mayberg’s
eyes—“Elizabeth Taylor eyes”—as though for the first time. And,
all of a sudden, an optical assault of psychedelic colors—like going

14 4

Anna Mehler Paperny

from Kansas to Oz. So vibrant she felt nauseous, needed sunglasses.
“It was really, truly, like a light switch went on. I processed color
that I hadn’t processed at all in those four years.”
The sensation disappeared when the electrode was moved or the
current was switched off but it was a sign to her doctors that they’d
found a sweet spot.
Then general anesthetic for another surgery, this one putting a
pulse generator beneath her clavicle and threading the twin wires
wormed into her brain down inside the right side of her neck and connecting them to her new battery pack. In the Kingston coffee shop
she lets me feel the ridged uneven bumps of skin on her right upper
chest and on either side of the top of her head. Surgical souvenirs.
They didn’t flip her switch right away: Deanna returned to the
Toronto hotel where she was staying to recover, then went back to
hospital to have the current turned on. Then back and forth for
months to figure out what level of electricity worked best. First big
shifts, to find a setting that made enough of a difference that Deanna
was well enough to return home to Kingston; then “a little bit of
fiddling” she’d drive into town for. “They literally just hold a remote
control over the battery. . . . There’s an On and an Off button and
there’s an Up and a Down button, and it’s like a phone screen so you
can see the voltage.”
And, somehow, the numbness lifted.
For the first time in four years, she could hug her kids and feel it.
She returned to work, astonishing herself. “That was never even
a goal.” In some ways, the transition was weirder for her colleagues
than it was for herself. “Not, ‘She’s a loose cannon; we can’t trust
her,’ but, ‘Let’s not give her too much because we don’t want to stress
her out.’ That took a period of time for people to feel confident that
I was OK.”
Deanna’s had electrodes buzzing in her brain ever since. Lows
like her grandmother’s death a couple of years later were bad, but not
nearly as catastrophic as she’d feared. She goes back under the knife
every couple of years to get the pulse generator removed from her

Old Illness, New Tricks: The Electrode in Your Brain

145

chest cavity and the battery replaced.
“It’s a bit of a pain. But it works. . . . I don’t want to go there ever
again in my life.”
The excitement over DBS’s initial success was contagious enough
to infect commercial medical device-makers, who went forward
with clinical trials. The two trials—one by Medtronic, a maker of
high-tech surgical, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and neurological tools; the other by St. Jude Medical, maker of the now-ubiquitous
mechanical late-1970s heart valves, among other things—both
flopped. The Medtronic study was “discontinued owing to perceived
futility” after failing to show significant improvement compared to
sham treatment after sixteen weeks; St. Jude’s was discontinued after
an analysis predicted the probability of a successful outcome to be
17.2 percent, at most.4
St. Jude Medical declined my request for an interview.
“Unfortunately we do not have FDA approval to offer DBS for
depression. We conducted a trial years ago, but we do not have that
indication and can’t talk about it outside of a research context,” a
spokesperson wrote in an email, suggesting I speak with Helen
Mayberg.5 Medtronic declined too. Talking to me without FDA
approval “would constitute off-label promotion,” a spokesperson
wrote in an email whose chain included a delicious forwarded note
from another Medtronic comms person: “I normally don’t support
books . . . [ellipsis in original] passing this request if it’s of interest.
No clue who this person is.” 6
The studies’ failures were a blow to Mayberg. Talking to her more
than a year later, in early 2016, it still stung.
“My advice [to them] was, ‘You don’t know enough to proceed
[with clinical trials yet].’ They thought they did. . . . It’s wildly dis­
appointing to see something I know works not do well in the trial. . . .
That’s just maddening. How can it not be? You can only set examples
by publishing your results, demonstrating that what you did worked,
and hope that people follow suit. I’m not queen, OK.”
What may have happened, she said, is that the researchers

146

Anna Mehler Paperny

mistook a shift from the emotional flatlining of despondence to a
fluctuating instability as a bad sign, when it may have been the mind
shaking itself awake. Or the researchers picked the wrong patients
in the first place. She suspects no one will want to pursue this kind
of clinical trial again until they have a reliable biomarker with
which to pick the right candidates. But none of this has dampened
her faith in her method or her plans to pursue it. What she’s left
asking herself is whether it’s ethical to provide a treatment that’s
been shown to work in individual cases but not in clinical trials;
whether it’s ethical to deny it to desperate people who’ve exhausted
all other options.
She figures more than three hundred patients have gotten DBS
for depression at three different brain sites. In most cases, over the
long term, Mayberg says, it works—“It doesn’t mean they can’t have
bad days or even depressions but they are no longer treatment resistant as they were prior.” 7
There’s certainly demand for it, although most of the people banging down Helen Mayberg’s door asking her to plant electrodes in
their brains don’t qualify for the procedure: THey haven’t failed all
existing approved treatments yet. “I’ve had thousands of calls to my
lab, and we take one in three hundred people. Because two hundred
and ninety-nine out of three hundred don’t meet that criteria. They
haven’t had ECT at all, they haven’t had effective treatment, and
they’re calling to get brain surgery.”

Ther e’s mor e than one way to plant an electrode in your brain,
and Darin Dougherty, the psychiatrist and director of neurotherapeutics at Massachusetts General Hospital, is chasing a more precise
way to jolt your neurons into health. Affable and patient, this is the
guy who walked me through all the -otomies when describing
the way surgeons burn sugar-cube-sized spheres in your brain to
treat your depression.
The electrode setups that have been tried so far for depression

Old Illness, New Tricks: The Electrode in Your Brain

147

—Helen Mayberg’s included—are “open loop” systems, where the
electrodes are basically in “go” mode from day one. Dougherty is
working on a “closed loop” system—a bit more complicated and
more sophisticated, he suggests: You have a responsive electrode
that’s monitoring your brain activity and, when it senses any abnormality associated with the pathology it’s there to treat, it switches
on and buzzes until your brain activity is normal again, at which
point it turns itself off.
So what suspicious neural activity could precipitate electrodebuzzing? Darin Dougherty’s trying to figure that out. You can’t
measure any of this well without getting deep into brain tissue so
he’s using people with severe epilepsy as “patients of opportunity,
because we can’t just take somebody off the street and put electrodes
in their brain.” 8 So while epileptic inpatients sit in the hospital with
a slew of electrodes nestled in their brains measuring seizure activity, Dougherty and his team run them through other behavioral tests
to see how they respond to various situations that give researchers
a sense of how their emotional processing is doing. Some of the
epilepsy patients Dougherty is studying have mental illnesses like
depression; others don’t. So he can compare the differences in neural
activity for each task between the healthy and unhealthy groups.
Dougherty’s research team got a $30 million grant from the
Department of Defense to study the use of closed-loop deep brain
stimulation on veterans with depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, traumatic brain injury, and substance use. Maybe the coolest
thing they’ve made so far is a little box they implant inside your brain
that measures everything—all the neural activity you’d otherwise
use a wardrobe-sized contraption to track. This is the thing that
would notice something wrong and tell various nodes of the electrodes snaking between the gyri of your brain to turn on or off.
Like the National Institute of Mental Health and others fed up
with the maddeningly inconsistent ways the disease we call depression manifests itself, Darin Dougherty is focusing his research on
addressing underlying symptoms rather than a one-size-fits-all label

148

Anna Mehler Paperny

of depression. He points out that a diagnosis of depression has to
satisfy five of the nine DSM criteria, yet two people could have vastly
different manifestations of the same disease, even if certain symptoms correlate—can you wake up in the morning? Do you want to
die? “To assume their circuitry is identical is somewhat foolhardy
and, in retrospect, could explain why open-loop deep brain stimulation wasn’t effective. . . . So we’re not even going there again. Been
there, done that.”

17
Old Illness, New Tricks:
From Psychedelics to Smartphones
Gerard Sanacora speaks of his work with a fervor out of keeping with
his measured academic diction, peppered as it is with qualifiers—
“as far as we know”; “for the most part”; “this probably isn’t the same
in all brain regions.” “In my mind it is probably the most exciting
development, at least for mood disorders, in the past fifty years. I
really do see it as a game changer. . . . It just opens up a whole new
vista of treatments.” 1
“It” is ketamine. Otherwise known as Special K—a hallucinogenic
street drug popular at raves. Up until recently its medical use was
mostly as an anesthetic. Now it appears to be pretty much the
­fastest-acting antidepressant ever. It’s been shown to work on people
who don’t respond to anything else. It’s also a dissociative hallucinogen prone to misuse, its antidepressant effects wear off rapidly, and
while we know repeated frequent use can badly damage your cognition (and worsen mood disorders) we don’t know how or whether it
can be clinically administered safely in multiple doses over a long
period of time. Oh, and studies of its efficacy have so far involved
teensy test-group sample sizes. Even if you combine them all they’re
pretty small. “We’re just starting to scratch the surface,” Sanacora says,
sitting at a table in the unassuming office in New Haven, Connecticut,
from which he heads Yale University’s Depression Research Program.

150

Anna Mehler Paperny

Part of the electric joy underlying this scratching of the surface
is that, for the first time, researchers could be coming up with a treatment that brings with it a better sense of how depression works on a
neurochemical level.
But the more Sanacora and his colleagues find out, the more complicated everything gets. It isn’t as simple as having too much or too
little of one chemical or another. It’s more likely a case of too much
signal or flexibility in one area and too little in another; feedback
loops gone awry.
He thinks depression is less about chemical surfeits and shortages and more about the brain’s ability to adapt to its environment.
Every experience you ever have changes your brain’s makeup:
Neurons fire, new connections are forming as you’re reading these
words. Neuroplasticity is the way your brain stores and retrieves new
information and the way it changes to fit changing environments or
circumstances. If your brain has trouble adapting, has trouble forming new connections or trimming extraneous ones, that’s a problem.
If depression is in part a plasticity issue, and if ketamine can
remedy that even temporarily, Sanacora hopes it’ll be possible to capitalize on that window of optimized flexibility to teach the brain new
coping mechanisms, through cognitive behavioral therapy or similar.
It’s still early, early, early days.
There’s a growing pool of evidence indicating that first shot of ketamine is effective. But the numbers of people involved in these studies
get a lot smaller when it comes to longer-running studies examining
the effects of multiple doses. In order for a drug to be approved for
a specific use (as an antidepressant in this case) you usually need to
follow thousands of people to ascertain not only whether it’s effective
at a given dose over a given time period, but whether it’s safe and what
the side effects are, and whether the safety and efficacy differ in different populations. You need lots of people and lots of time for that.
Thanks to human misuse and animal experiments we already
know ketamine can wreck your brain if you take too much of it too
often or for too long, and that there’s a very fine line between the

Old Illness, New Tricks: From Psychedelics to Smartphones

151

ideal therapeutic dose and a severely damaging one.
“What I see clinically that really worries me,” Gerard Sanacora
says, taking a moment to curb his enthusiasm, “is people who take
it all the time. There’s good evidence that people who abuse ketamine
or use it on a regular basis do have cognitive impairments. There’s
evidence of structural abnormalities.”
The Food and Drug Administration approved ketamine for the
treatment of depression in March 2019.2 (As of this writing, it hasn’t
been approved by Health Canada but is being offered in some private clinics.) But probably tens of thousands of patients had already
been prescribed ketamine off-label before that. For example, at Yale,
Sanacora had used it clinically, outside of research, for patients that
were very well screened. And he felt that the risk-benefit ratio justified the use.
Just don’t try it at home. “I would never recommend that. Period.
Zippo.”
Queasiness around giving people a month’s worth of ketamine
to take home and spray up their noses goes beyond the drug’s potential to be misused and diverted, sold on the street. It can also be
dangerous even if taken as directed. Even Sanacora’s patients who
get it clinically have to be closely supervised every time.
“It’s relatively safe, but if you start treating thousands or tens of
thousands of people, people are going to die.”
Ketamine is exciting enough to be enticing some pharmaceutical
companies to get back into the game despite depression’s businesscase turnoffs.
It’s easy to be skeptical of corporate bromides on the importance
of finding new and improved depression treatments, especially given
the industry’s failure to do so over the past half century. But Husseini
Manji, head of Janssen pharmaceutical company’s neuroscience therapeutic area, sounds genuinely jazzed about ketamine when I call
him up.
“Depression is so disabling for so many people. And for many
people, they don’t get an adequate response to the existing treatment.

152

Anna Mehler Paperny

And even if they do, it often takes four to eight weeks [to take effect].” 3
Manji is heading up Janssen’s ketamine research. One of his
studies took people with treatment-resistant depression, who’d been
depressed for at least three continuous years and had gone through
at least six antidepressants. Many had been failed by ECT, as well.
Half got intravenous ketamine, half got an intravenous saline solution. The results were astonishing: Within two hours, 60 percent of
the ketamine patients began to respond; within a day, 70 percent did.
That’s a huge response for any illness. But even more so for depression, for which, as he pointed out, most treatments take at least six
weeks to kick in, if you’re lucky. “This was staggering,” Manji said,
his serious tone belying the excitement in his voice. The magic didn’t
last long: Depression symptoms returned within a week. But it was
something. “That got everyone very excited.”
He and his colleagues focused on intranasal administration, the
way you’d spray a decongestant up your nose. It’s simpler and
requires fewer personnel than intravenous use—you don’t need
people trained to administer an IV drip, for example—but it’s also
a more efficient delivery system than a pill, he says. Pills are better
for controlled, consistent release of an active ingredient as it meanders through your digestive tract and into your bloodstream. With
ketamine, Manji said, you want it into your brain ASAP. “There’s
actually a direct nose-to-brain connection, so we thought intranasal
administration might do that.”
They also switched to ketamine’s molecular mirror image, the
esketamine isomer, which is in theory more potent—you can get an
adequate dose in very few drops. Industry observers say it’s also
arguably easier to patent something that’s just a teensy bit different
from what’s been in use in various forms for decades: So instead of
having a cheap molecule everyone can use, you have an expensive,
patented one (patents are important; pharma companies are not in
this biz to be nice).
Manji figures ketamine’s mechanism of action is several steps
downstream from what we’ve been doing all these years. It’s more

Old Illness, New Tricks: From Psychedelics to Smartphones

153

direct, he says, than inhibiting the sucking up of neurotransmitters
like serotonin and dopamine into the neuron. So if we’re taking
a more biochemically direct route, he reasons, that could explain the
relatively rapid effect and why ketamine has worked on people for
whom more conventional treatments have failed.
Yes, ketamine will make you high, especially the first time you get
it. “You feel that the room might not seem quite real, or you don’t seem
quite real. You might be floating or something like that.” But he argues
that their studies so far indicate you can use ketamine chronically,
under close medical observation, at least in the medium term, without
it damaging your cognition. “If anything, we see cognition improve,
because depression itself is associated with impaired cognition.”
It isn’t yet clear how long you’ll have to keep squirting esketamine up your nose or at what frequency before you achieve and
maintain remission. Manji hopes that adding traditional antidepressants and psychotherapy after about four weeks of esketamine will
let you gradually reduce the frequency of ketamine doses without
losing their ameliorative effect. But here, again, we need more
longer-­term studies with more people to see how that goes.
One such Janssen study published in early 2018 found people
who got esketamine in addition to their regular antidepressants
(first twice-weekly, then weekly, then semi-weekly up-the-nose
doses) had better depression scores, on average, than the people who
got a placebo, and most of them stayed in relative remission eight
weeks into the study.4 Here, again, the sample size was relatively
small (sixty-seven people total, which meant that just thirty-four
got the intervention in the first phase) and I’d wonder how blinded
your study is if the placebo is water with a bittering agent made to
taste like esketamine, but which won’t make you high. Surely you
would notice pretty quickly. Either way, encouraging to the layperson. It’ll be nice to see how they propose patients hang on to that
lessening of shit symptoms.
When electroconvulsive therapy failed to lift my bottom-feeder
mood, a doctor recommended I try ketamine. It wasn’t approved for

154

Anna Mehler Paperny

depression by Health Canada but the hospital where I was staying
had been prescribing it off-label and they were confident in its safety
and encouraged by its efficacy. So I tried it, squirting a bitter liquid
up my nose every 72 hours. It had an immediate dissociative effect—
a feeling of being not quite inside my body—which I took advantage
of, to examine toxic thoughts the way you’d squint at a vista made
newly visible through improved perspective. But I never got the nextday sense of well-being I was hoping for, and eventually that dissociative feeling dissipated, too. I started to feel like I was just
approaching these interventions with unrealistic expectations, or
simply doing them wrong altogether.
Janssen also tested esketamine on suicidal inpatients, who either
got ketamine plus “treatment as usual” (antidepressant and/or psychotherapy), or placebo plus treatment as usual and found that it
had significant effects, on top of whatever else they were taking.
But, I asked Gerard Sanacora, as we walked down the stairs of
his university building and out into New Haven sunshine, even if
you can alleviate someone’s pressing desire to die in the immediate
term—which, don’t get me wrong, would be awesome—would you
be any more willing to release that person from an emergency room
or a psych ward knowing the magic potion you’d just given them
would wear off within days of their hospitalization? He agrees he’d
be hesitant, too.
Husseini Manji of Janssen Pharma admits there’s been inadequate attention paid to the public health crisis that is suicide and
depression. “Because the field is so complex and so uncertain, most
companies have decided to focus on things they feel more confident
about. Which I think is very unfortunate because the unmet need
of psychiatric disorders is so staggering. Once we get more confident
then we can make headway. Then [R&D investment] will all come
flooding back. The hope is that esketamine is part of that new era.”

For Special K as an antidepressant, the high is a bug. For magic
mushrooms as antidepressant, it’s a feature.

Old Illness, New Tricks: From Psychedelics to Smartphones

155

The first tiny-scale studies into the use of psilocybin capsules—
pills containing the active ingredient in magic mushrooms—are predicated in large part on the positive correlation between the patient’s
“mystical” experience and a reduction in depression symptoms.
Here I have to be honest: Medical mysticism is not my thing. But
that’s the magic behind using mushrooms to cure incurable depression, so here we go.
Darrick May wants to be a psychedelics-assisted therapist but so
far he just gets to play one in pilot studies.
The Maryland-based Johns Hopkins University psychiatrist
designed America’s first trial examining the efficacy and safety of
psilocybin to treat treatment-resistant depression (a similar, similarly
small study had shown promising results in the UK the year before).
Twenty-four people with severe depression who’d been failed by
multiple treatments would be divided into two groups of twelve.
Each would get two doses of psilocybin a week apart but one would
go through the process ten weeks later. “This way everyone gets
psilocybin.” 5
You can’t have a double-blind (or single-blind, or any kind of
blind) trial when everyone knows whether they’ve gotten high or
not: THe placebo effect’s too obvious. There’s no good sham treatment to use as a control, Darrick May tells me. So, staggering the
groups is not the gold standard, but is better than nothing.
When I talked to him he was in the early recruiting stages for the
study. He wouldn’t tell me much about participant criteria—how
many courses of depression treatment they had to have gone through
with no results in order to qualify, for example—because he was
afraid people would lie about their medical histories to get in. That’s
how popular the promise of free magic mushrooms and hours of
quality time with trained professionals talking to you about your
feelings can be: He got calls and emails from people in dire depressing straits across the country; he had to choose twenty-four. “It’s
kind of a disheartening exercise.”
Darrick May doesn’t yet know what magic mushrooms’

156

Anna Mehler Paperny

mechanism of action is. He seemed enthused about the possibilities
but also realistic from a clinical perspective. He says studies have
shown reduction in subjects’ depression symptoms “was positively
correlated to how much of a mystical experience they had—that
score on the mystical experience scale.”
I ask, doesn’t the degree of subjectivity almost guarantee a confirmation bias? People who like the idea of a mystical hippy-trippy
experience will love taking psilocybin, will report a mystical experience, and get better after taking it. He admits they’re also going to
be the ones to volunteer for the trial. “People that seek out this treatment are very interested in trying it and probably have some positive associations and really believe that it can help them. . . . So that
is a bias. But it would be unethical, or it would be impossible, to give
it to someone who doesn’t believe in it at all or thinks it’s going to
hurt them.” There are plenty of people out there who already self-­
medicate with shrooms or acid or ayahuasca or whatever hallucinogen they prefer. And, he adds, there’s a lot of discussion in the
psychedelic research community as to what clinicians’ role is in
encouraging or quashing that: “Is it ethical to recommend a treatment that can be so psychologically impactful, both positive and
negative?”
He does recommend a controlled environment. If you’re going
to do psychedelics, use drugs whose makeup has been molecularly
confirmed in a health facility, and do them with a doctor, he recommends—not in a yurt in a forest.
There’s a lot of getting-to-know-you time before your clinical
shrooms trip, May says: THe clinicians guide you through the process (yes, they are called “guides”), talk with you about your life,
your hopes and dreams and what the experience will be like. On the
day of, avoid a huge breakfast—messes with absorption—take a
urine test and a baseline questionnaire and swallow the psilocybin
capsule with a glass of water in a cozy room with a couch, meditation cushions, incandescent lights and the kind of ambience I’d
expect in a yogi’s home office.

Old Illness, New Tricks: From Psychedelics to Smartphones

157

“For the first half hour we usually have them look at some picture books, like nature or mandalas—we just want them to relax
during that period.” Then you lie down, put eyeshades and headphones on and spend six hours listening to a music playlist and
having an “inner experience.”
Some have bad trips, but with all the preparation and in that controlled environment, it’s rare. Guides tell them to “meet and greet
anything that comes up, and be curious about it. If something is
scary, then ask, ‘Why is this scaring me?’ and if there’s a monster
there, look in the monster’s eyes and say, ‘What are you doing here?
What can I learn from you?’”
Who should get this drug? “It’s too early to say if anybody should
be getting this drug. I mean, it has not been proven that it does work.
There’s only been pilot studies,” May says. Even he, for all his belief
in the power of mystical experiences to attenuate depression over
the long term, doesn’t see pharmacies dispensing shrooms any time
soon. He doesn’t think patients should be given pill bottles of synthetic psilocybin capsules. The practice should be restricted to the
way it’s being provided in his study: in six-hour sessions in a comfy
room under the auspices of a trained guide to take care of you.
“There’s too much potential for bad outcomes” otherwise.

People love the idea of personalized treatment. Everyone
wants to be a special snowflake.
That’s what biomarkers could make possible: If researchers can
find those telltale, testable tags in your biology that indicate without a shadow of a doubt whether you have a given disorder, and
what treatment you’re most likely to respond to, it would eliminate
much of the fumbling guesswork that now characterizes depression treatment.
But even if efforts to determine who’s most likely to respond to
which treatments pan out, that’s of little use if we don’t have effective alternatives for the people found unlikely to respond to existing

158

Anna Mehler Paperny

treatment options. Congratulations, Patient 8473! Blood analysis has
determined you’re less likely to respond to antidepressants. Stand
by while we develop other treatments and ways to test whether they’ll
work on you. Your estimated wait time is . . . about ten years. Please
stay on the line: Your health is important to us.
Don’t tell Madhukar Trivedi, on the cutting edge of this field at the
University of Texas Southwestern’s Center for Depression Research
and Clinical Care, that biomarkers aren’t worth chasing. The director
gives reasons for hope even among our interventions’ limitations.
“The crux of my work these days is to develop and validate biomarkers. So the short answer is yes, we definitely need to identify specific biomarkers for specific individual patients.” 6 Instead of having
a clinician walk you through a series of questions about your thoughts,
feelings, mood, and ability to accomplish day-to-day tasks to determine whether you have a mood disorder, you could have a blood test
or a brain test or a cheek swab or a stool test that would hopefully,
Trivedi says, then match the right treatment to the right patient.
He acknowledges we’re a ways away from being able to do that
with any degree of confidence. Is he optimistic? “Depends on the day
of the week you ask me, and also my capacity to predict the future.”
Trivedi argues fervently that, for people in the depths of depressive
misery, accurate biomarkers could mean the difference between years
of trying different treatment modalities and hitting on the right one
in a matter of weeks. But, selfishly, as someone who’s been through an
assload of meds, years of psychotherapy, and rTMS, and who may
face the prospect of ECT sometime in the future, if I had to choose
between funding long-term research into biomarkers and research
into better treatments, I’d choose the latter in a suicidal heartbeat.
It isn’t either-or, he tells me. “We have to continue research to
­identify new treatments. . . . But there’s a lot of work being done to identify new treatments.” And with biomarkers, “at least we will be doing
this in a more scientific, rigorous manner and not trial and error.”
Biomarkers are alluring for pharmaceutical companies who’ve
been turned off depression research because the failure rates are so

Old Illness, New Tricks: From Psychedelics to Smartphones

159

high, the screening and progress measurement methods so fuzzy,
because we don’t really have a decent road map to develop treatments.
Biomarkers, he hopes, could improve that road map, making testing
more precise and maybe shedding a light on how the dis­order works,
luring drug makers back into the field. They could also, as Ken Kaitin,
the director of the Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development,
points out to me, make those drugs more likely to get FDA approval.7
And then there’s the algorithm approach. It skips the pesky need for
scientific breakthroughs and focuses on the product we keep churning
out for tech giants: our personal data. As in every walk of life today,
people are pioneering ways to personalize your depression treatment
by harnessing your personal information and that of thousands of
others. There are companies that will take your responses to a clinically
validated questionnaire and use them to determine what course of treatment is most likely to work for you. Others use more “passive” inputs
such as your daily behavior to assess the state of your mind.
The potential for data mining would seem to be even greater if your
phone becomes your shrink, tracking your mental health (or its perception of your mental health) in real time. “We need to get away from
this paradigm which is basically diagnose and treat: We want to predict and preempt,” says Janssen’s Husseini Manji. “Wouldn’t it be fantastic if you could, you know, get an early warning sign that someone’s
depression is getting worse, or they’re getting more suicidal?”
Silicon Valley has been betting on big data and the desire for a
psychiatrist in your pocket. Google’s health sciences arm, Verily,
wooed National Institute of Mental Health head Thomas Insel to
chase data-driven mental illness solutions. Then Insel left Verily
to do similar work at a start-up called Mindstrong.8
The idea behind these companies is to harness smartphones and the
wealth of information they constantly collect—where you go, what you
search, whom you text or message, whom you talk to, whose calls you
ignore, what you say or type when communicating—to tackle mental
illness. That would give you “a digital phenotype—a way of using digital information to get objective measures of behavior,” Insel told me back

160

Anna Mehler Paperny

in 2015, when he was still at Verily. “You can use that data to predict
downstream events, like onset of mania, onset of depression, maybe the
onset of psychosis.”9 According to Mindstrong’s website, its team used
machine learning and closely studied research volunteers to develop
“digital biomarkers” comprising swiping and tapping interactions with
your touchscreen to assess your mental state.10
Mental health apps have proliferated, surpassing ten thousand.11
Evidence supporting them has not kept pace. For one thing, there’s
a paucity of randomized controlled trials testing how well these
apps work.12 But the potential remains huge. So does the potential
for harm: Among other things, “nonevidence-based applications may
distract patients and potentially cause them to delay seeking care,”
John Torous and Laura Weiss Roberts write in JAMA Psychiatry.13
Here I have to ask: How do you use that data, and who uses it? What
do you do with that information when you get it? Where do you store
it, how do you keep it secure? Who has access to it—the patient?
Clinicians? What inputs trigger what kind of response? If certain health
states mean you’re robbed of autonomy, committed to hospital, would
you want your phone making that assessment, alerting the authorities,
your insurance providers? What about your employer?
I don’t know whether my phone would think I’m crazy, whether
my patterns of email and Twitter use, my phone calls with sources
and texts with friends, my typing, swiping, and tapping patterns,
spell out something pathological. But I can say unequivocally that
I’d be leery of having all that data collated, and if the disclosures I
make or the conclusions my phone draws could result in a chain of
notifications that’d lead to cops showing up at my door and ushering me into a crisis ward, I would think twice and would probably
avoid doing so altogether. But that’s just me.

The str anger on the street beseechingly yelling at you to “Smile,
sweetie!” isn’t harassing you: He’s just looking out for your mental
health.

Old Illness, New Tricks: From Psychedelics to Smartphones

161

That’s the idea behind treating depression with—wait for it—
Botox.
The premise is seductively simple: Turn your frown upside-down.
Or, if that fails, paralyze your frowny face muscles entirely. If you
can’t make a sad face, you won’t be depressed.
The multinational pharma giant and Botox maker Allergan is conducting clinical trials in the hopes of obtaining FDA approval of
Botox’s use for major depressive disorder. But Eric Finzi, the doctor,
dermatologic surgeon, and author of The Face of Emotion: How Botox
Affects Our Moods and Relationships, has been injecting depressed
patients with Botox, off-label, since 2003.
“Botox is a way of influencing your mind, your brain, without you
having to do anything, because I am influencing negative facial
expressions,” he tells me by phone.14
It’s not quite the same as the Botox injections associated with
people wanting to be wrinkle-free: He injects the Botox into your
corrugator muscles, the ones between your eyebrows that furrow
when you frown.
Your facial expressions aren’t simply the externalization of signals initiated by your emotional brain: THey send signals right back,
Finzi says, as part of a hard-wired animal feedback system. By
short-circuiting part of that feedback loop, he says, you break the
perpetuation of depression. “If you have sad thoughts, you will activate those muscles between your eyebrows. And if you activate those
muscles between your eyebrows, your thoughts will get sadder. So
it’s a circuit. And what Botox does is it’s sort of like putting a clip and
cutting temporarily this neuronal circuit. . . . If you’re not frowning,
it sends the signal back to your brain continuously: ‘Hello, you have
not frowned in the last month. Life must be pretty good out there.’” 15
Finzi figures he injects a few depressed people a week with Botox
to alleviate their depression. They’re referred to him by psychiatrists,
psychologists, family doctors. Because it’s off-label they’re paying out
of pocket, about $400 a pop. On most people it works for about three
months, at which point they need a booster shot. He’s less certain

162

Anna Mehler Paperny

that partially paralyzing one of your facial muscles will also prevent a
depressed person from killing themselves. “I can’t say that [suicidal
people wouldn’t commit suicide if they got Botox between their eyebrows]. I mean, that’s quite a leap.” But he said he had one patient whose
suicidal thoughts went away a few days after getting Botox.
But, I ask, if preventing a person from frowning means they’re no
longer depressed, wouldn’t getting a person to smile do the same?
“There’s no data” proving that, he says. But “I think it’s a good idea
for anybody depressed to be laughing and smiling more. . . . I will tell
my depressed patients to smile more. But I have no idea whether it
works or not. I don’t know.”
I’m not a scientist or a doctor and I don’t know anything about
Botox. But if you told me to smile more in order to stop wanting to
kill myself, I’d be hard pressed not to punch you in the face.

So which, if any of these—deep brain stimulation, ketamine,
psilocybin, biomarkers, Botox, a smartphone psychiatrist—will
prove to actually work for real people in the real world?
The process of evaluating any new treatment should be the same,
Sarah Lisanby, who was wonderful about letting me call back and
ask dumb questions, tells me in one of our several conversations on
the phone from NIMH in Maryland: What is its mechanism of
action—what is it doing, and how does it do that? What are its
effects on the pathology you’re targeting—what does it do to symptoms and how do we know that this is what’s doing that, and not
something else? This is a purposely high bar, she points out, one
we’ve yet to meet for many existing antidepressants.16
“The field is scratching its head,” she says, about why the deep
brain stimulation trials based on Helen Mayberg’s work failed. But
she suspects it may be an issue of network precision—not just where
the electrodes go but what the spots they stimulate are connected
to; not just location but tuning. Ten pulses per second? A hundred?
That’s part of what Darin Dougherty’s trial at Massachusetts General

Old Illness, New Tricks: From Psychedelics to Smartphones

163

Hospital is seeking to answer. “The brain is a complex distributed
network, a complex system, and we shouldn’t be surprised that initial attempts were met with limited success, because we need to
refine them. We need to be smarter. This is a bad analogy, but we’ve
all had the experience where we’re dealing with a GPS system and
the GPS isn’t working and it’s telling us to take an exit which is the
wrong exit. And we need to give the surgeons a better GPS, so they
know which of these nearby highways and exits to target.”
This all sounds fanciful and far away to someone wrestling with
bullshit depression right this second. But Sarah Lisanby’s enthusiasm is catching. Like when it comes to smart wires that snake their
own way through your brain. Existing wires are rigid. When you
stick them into the brain it’s easy to poke through blood vessels,
damage tissue. Researchers are working on smart, flexible polymers
that can be “snaked around blood vessels, so they can clear the tissue
non-destructively,” she says to me. “You’d like to have electrodes that
can insert themselves and navigate around the brain structures. It’s
almost like science fiction, right? But it’s science fact.”

18
Stigma and Related Bullshit
I am so beyond tired of the word stigma. Perhaps it once had resonance. Maybe its utterance once conjured a concrete, clearly delineated concept. But repetition has rendered it meaningless, the way
a surfeit of swearing robs cuss words of their sting. “Stigma” came
up in every interview I did for this book—with clinicians, with
researchers, with people grappling with depression and suicide and
with their family members. But its ubiquity in discourse lets us elide
the agonizing crappiness it describes.
So let’s be really, really clear about what persistent stigma means
for people with severe mental illness.
You’re faking it.
You’re delusional.
You’re weak.
You’re untrustworthy.
You’re selfish.
You’re self-pitying.
You’re unstable.
You’re dangerous.
You can’t make your own decisions.
You’re dumb.

168

Anna Mehler Paperny

Your contributions are less worthy, more easily discounted.
You’re a liability—personally and professionally and socially.
You aren’t friend or lover or colleague or employee material.
You make other people uncomfortable to the point they actively
avoid you.
You’re less lovable.
You’re less deserving of effective, accessible treatment than people
with other illnesses.
You aren’t worth the time or resources it would take to find out
more about what’s wrong with you.
People would rather not deal with you or your problem.

That’s stigma. It’s gross and profoundly damaging.

Poor Stacey was just doing her job when she phoned, a representative of an employer’s insurer quizzing an employee about a
sudden protracted absence from work. But instead of a malingerer
caught in the middle of a bedridden movie marathon, she got me:
crazy lady pacing her curtained-off corner of the short-stay psych
ward, shiftily clutching the cell phone she wasn’t supposed to be
using. By then I’d been there more than a week—a lifetime by that
ward’s standards. I knew I wasn’t being set free and was about to be
sent upstairs at any moment. I was a jumpy motherfucker.
“Hi, Anna? We were just wondering about your absence from
work. . . .”
“Uh, yeah. I’m in the hospital. . . .”
“Right. Can you tell me why?”
“I tried to kill myself.”
It was the first time I’d uttered those words—vertiginously
terrifying and emboldening all at once. I freaked myself out almost
as much as I freaked out Stacey.
“Oh.” Long pause. “Yes, I think we would cover that.”
I realized later how lucky I was to have gotten short-term dis­ability

Stigma and Related Bullshit

169

coverage, about seven-tenths of my salary, during four sick leaves at
three different employers: two in the ICU and psych wards after
suicide attempts, one when taking sick days on short notice threatened my continued employment and prompted a strenuously recommended three-week leave of absence, and another for six months
as I recovered from a particularly brutalizing suicide attempt.
I swear, depression doesn’t make me fuck up assignments. I can
write stories and break news and still achieve, some days, that immersive euphoric high in pursuit of a story, can lose myself in interviews
about neonatal abstinence syndrome or opioid misuse or the Higgs
boson. There are bad days and worse weeks—I almost missed a press
conference about a fatal shooting because I was having a minor breakdown in a bathroom stall; I spent a panicked drowning week chasing
breaking news on a caved-in mall even as I struggled to focus on anything but oblivion. I spent weeks going to work in a zombielike state.
But it was the periods between purpose-giving stories, when I went
home and couldn’t go to bed and couldn’t wake up, couldn’t get
dressed, couldn’t leave the apartment, that fucked me over. Again and
again and again. I struggled to explain inexplicable absences: How do
you say, “I missed work because I was flattened by self-loathing and I
didn’t tell you enough hours in advance because I was flattened by
self-loathing” without sounding like a nutbar or a liar or irritatingly
self-pitying? I gnawed my pen to avoid crying in a meeting with two
managers wondering aloud why the person who worked like a fiend
was showing up at eleven o’clock. When one of them implored across
his desk, “Give us something to work with here,” I caved and told him
the truth and immediately wished I hadn’t. In another meeting a year
later—different manager, same reason—my self-control failed and I
wept so profusely I embarrassed us both. How could anyone ever
hope for a normal professional relationship after that? How do you
make that anything other than a professional sucker punch?
I don’t know if it’s possible to convince myself, much less another
person, that I’m not a workplace liability. I do know that every time
I’ve told someone about my mood disorder I’ve come to regret it.

170

Anna Mehler Paperny

(So it’s maybe weird, then, that I’m writing this book. And I’d
be lying if I said I don’t worry this mass disclosure will be something
I regret. But sometimes some things feel too important not to do.)
We talk a big game about talking. Online hashtag culture creates
a cult of confessionals. There’s #sicknotweak (i.e., mental illness is a
sickness, not a weakness). In Canada, a corporate-­sponsored campaign called “Bell Let’s Talk” spawns an annual flood of personal
mental illness disclosures.1 Various celebrities, from British princes
on down, are big on awareness campaigns. In the face of our fetishization of openness, Toronto’s Center for Addiction and Mental Health
psychologist Donna Ferguson suggests people pause before disclosing a mental illness, even to those closest to them. I interviewed her
for a Global News online story. “You really want to know what the
relationships are like . . . and how supportive people are,” she says.
“You never want [someone with mental illness] to tell people and
feel ashamed or criticized or ostracized.” When it comes to the workplace, she’s unequivocal. “I honestly don’t think it’s employers’ business. If you’re off on a medical leave, you’re off on a medical leave. Or
if you’re at work still, and things are not going well, some people feel
comfortable saying to their direct supervisor, ‘I’m having some
symptoms.’ And I think if you don’t, don’t. You don’t have to. You’re
not obligated. . . . It’s personal. It’s confidential.” 2
Openness is key. Talking is everything. But there are days I want
to shout her words from the rooftops.
In fact, in many jurisdictions, your boss isn’t even legally allowed
to ask, except in extenuating circumstances—for example, if it’s part
of affirmative action (and your response is optional), or if you’ve
asked for accommodation, or if there is “objective” evidence that
your actions may be endangering others. But it’s one thing to know
that; it’s another to feel pressured to disclose only to kick yourself
for it afterward. I’ve found myself struggling to make my mood disorder sound sufficiently serious to warrant whatever weird absences
or lack of drive I’m asked to explain while simultaneously downplaying any impression of unstable lunacy. Failing at both.

Stigma and Related Bullshit

171

In chasing this book I talked to people who’d experienced—
directly and personally—the brunt of depression and suicide from
all their myriad shit-ass angles. They trusted me with their most personal stories and in some cases I promised not to fully identify them,
because being known as someone wrestling with depression can still
shaft you in innumerable ways. And that’s bullshit.
I talked to Mary in a bustling dark café-bar on Toronto’s Danforth
Avenue.

Mary
Honesty cost Mary dearly. It obliterated financial security in the
event of death, disease, or injury: Any protracted absence from
work will throw her and her teenage daughter into financial peril.
Mary doesn’t smoke or skydive or do drugs; her health and blood
pressure are better than average. But she has depression and she
told her employer’s insurer the truth when asked. And now there’s
a hard cap on the amount of life insurance she can get. She’s ineligible for any short-term or long-term disability payments, no matter
the reason.
“I could break my ankle walking out of here and I wouldn’t be covered. I could get cancer. I could get influenza. I could get all kinds of
things but I get no coverage. Because I have depression. And that was
the sole reason. There is no question that is the only reason I got
refused.”3 At one job after another in both the public and private sector,
Mary hesitates over the paperwork query asking whether she has
depression. “I’ve struggled, really, with the thought of, ‘Jeez, do I really
write that down?’ [But] I can’t bear the thought of not being honest.
And if they find out you haven’t been honest they can void all of your
coverage. And because I’m a single parent, I need some of it.”
The purpose of life insurance is peace of mind, so the denial of coverage because you’re crazy is its opposite. Knowing you can’t afford to
take time to heal if you need it makes for a state of perpetual insecurity.

172

Anna Mehler Paperny

So I sought out some of the voices representing Canada’s insurers
(US giant Kaiser Permanente declined my request) and they emphasized that every case is unique. But the representatives I spoke with
said it’s unusual for someone to be denied all coverage, for anything,
because of one condition.
Insurance companies are not charities. They’re in the business of
shielding themselves from financial risk. Life, health, disability or
income-loss coverage can be denied if the potential cost is seen as
being too high.
And often mental illness is too big a risk to stomach.
Insurers call it anti-selection—“a policy taken with the intent to
benefit from it to the detriment of the insurer,” as Claude Di Stasio,
former vice president of Quebec affairs and holder of the mental
health file at the Canadian Life and Health Insurers Association,
puts it. Classic example: You buy home insurance, then set the place
on fire. But what about when the harm you do is to yourself? Let’s
say you apply for health or life insurance and you get it—either
you’ve never been diagnosed with depression or you tell them about
your diagnosis and they’re cool with it. Don’t even think about killing yourself for the next two years: Your beneficiaries will get zero
dollars. Insurers worry that people kill themselves as a ruse to bilk
their carrier and get money for their family. (This is all, incidentally,
a great way to ensure people never talk about the illness eating them
up inside.)
“We’re trying to be clean and not discriminate, but we don’t want
mental health people benefiting from claims they should not to the
detriment of other people,” Di Stasio says.4
Trying to die or harming yourself without dying is also financially unwise. Many policies exclude self-inflicted injuries, so if you
need income replacement or care that isn’t covered by the public
system, you’re out of luck. If you want to try to get it covered, you’d
have to prove not only that the self-inflicted injury is the product of
mental illness but that there wasn’t really intent—that you didn’t
know what you were doing.

Stigma and Related Bullshit

173

Karen Cutler, the chief underwriter at Manulife, Canada’s multi­
national insurance company, tells me by phone that the company
offers coverage to the vast majority of people who are mired in or
have gone through depression. They’re looking for signs that you’re
coping and stable—for upward of two years, ideally—sussing this
out through phone interviews, cover letters, questionnaires. “It’s no
different than if we’re looking at someone with diabetes or high
blood pressure. How much time has passed, are you taking your
medication, are you controlling your symptoms?” 5 Every plan and
every situation is unique. As I write these words I am eyeing the
little pill bottles paid for (thank the chronic illness gods) by my
employer’s insurer. But if you have a history of being prescribed
antidepressants, Cutler says, chances are you won’t get coverage for
those antidepressants. If you have a history of missing work, changing jobs, or needing time off work as a result of your depression, you
probably won’t get disability coverage or, if you do, it will be limited.
“And that’s just common sense. From a business perspective, it
makes sense,” Cutler says. Being hospitalized for depression, even if
it was multiple years ago, won’t count in your favor. But, she adds,
“when we underwrite people we underwrite with the lens of, you
know, ‘There but for the grace of God go I.’ Our goal is to try to offer
coverage, not to try to find reasons not to offer coverage.”

De a n na
Deanna Cole-Benjamin, who’d shared her story with me in the
Kingston café, recounted how her suicidal ideation and her psychiatric hospitalization jeopardized not only her own health insurance,
but her kids’—even after she received treatment that pushed her
years-long grapple with depression into remission. “I was ‘too highrisk.’ They just said, ‘If we are not going to insure you, we cannot
insure anyone in your family.’” 6 She might have been tempted not
to disclose her mental illness, Deanna says. But her employer already

174

Anna Mehler Paperny

knew, because her crippling disorder rendered her unable to work
for years, long after short- and long-term disability payments
expired. She lost all her benefits and when she reapplied, her prior
illness was already known.
That refusal played a role in prompting Deanna to seek work elsewhere. “It’s terrible. And you’re just contributing to that whole
stigma: You don’t want to talk to your friend because you don’t know
who your friend knows who might say something to somebody.
That’s not right.”

Mary
Insurers aside, Mary’s gotten better at assessing how someone in her
personal or professional life will respond to her disclosure. She’s had
to. “There are always some people where, you know, ‘Maybe I’m not
going to share this particular aspect of my existence with you,’” she
said. “You pick up certain vibes around people” in how they react to
difference and craziness in others—in the news, on the street, in the
office. Even people who think they can deal with it, who say the right
words, sometimes freak out just a bit. I’ve had that happen. Friends,
employers who make empathic noises, who convince me and themselves that they’re cool with crazy lady, suddenly ghost on me, or turn
wary. “They don’t know how it manifests and they don’t know what
they’re going to do. And I think that’s the more difficult piece. . . .
Like, ‘Are you going to turn into a serial killer?’”
Mary’s had depression used against her by romantic partners,
“with the suggestion that ‘well, you’re weak. You’re the weak one,
here. You’re crazy. You’re the one that’s the problem. . . . It’s because
you’re like this that everything is wrong.’ Which your brain is also
telling you.”
She’s had coworkers who say she’s just too sensitive to handle
the challenges and setbacks of everyday life. “That you don’t have
the gumption for whatever’s going on. You can’t stand up for the

Stigma and Related Bullshit

175

tough fights. . . . I can hear one particular voice, and it’s twenty
years ago. And it’s such an affront.” The worst is the way comments
like these reinforce your own self-loathing. “Depression is extremely
isolating. And it’s self-isolating. Your brain starts to tell you nobody
will understand.”
Then there’s the flip side. People still approach Mary for advice
or just to talk to someone who knows what it’s like. “They want recognition that, you know, they’re in the same boat. It’s really an
important touchstone to know ‘You understand my situation. I know
you can’t solve it, but you understand it.’ They may not have anyone
else who does.”
In her decades wrestling with depression, Mary amassed “an
exceptional support network. I have more than a few people who are
totally open to being there if I need it.” But she’s never tested that
openness. She says she’s paralytically afraid of being seen as weak,
afraid they will think differently of her.

The fear of r ejection, the sense that your very presence damages those you care about most, propagates emotional isolation. And
the loneliness makes you crazy. You don’t notice till someone mentions your viselike bear hugs. Then you realize you’ve been sending
meaningless weightless messages to random people in the hopes of
striking up an escapist exchange about nothing. You’ve been atomizing human contact: Tightly interwoven fingers in clasped hands;
the feeling of leaning sideways against someone on a couch. You start
weirdly wishing for time spent with dogs and babies—their social
expectations are simpler, it seems; their methods of communicating
affection more straightforward. How dumb is it that I, so priding
myself on my independence and so prizing my solitude, can so graspingly need someone to talk to?
When I was a kid our family had a dog named Charlie. Gorgeous
chocolate Lab. Shameless droopy begging eyes. Extreme affection.
Unbelievable stupidity. He made a point of devouring the grossest

176

Anna Mehler Paperny

things he’d find on walks—decomposing fauna, mostly; and seaweed,
for some reason. He’d expel it hours later, one way or another, like
clockwork. And on our next walk he’d do the exact same thing.
Whatever synaptic connections are supposed to be formed to create
memories and then retrieve them to inform future decision-making,
that wasn’t happening.
Same thing happens to me when it comes to discussing pathological misery. I try it. It’s horrible. I vow never to do it again. Time
passes. And inevitably the desire to vent is so great, the prospect of
some measure of comfort so alluring, that sandy dead crab so tasty,
I spill. I break the brittle shell holding everything together.
It’s not supposed to work that way. People say, “Tell me if I can
help with anything”; “You know you can call me any time, right?”
And don’t get me wrong: THere are times I would reach out and feel
truly heard, feel like I was grasping something solid for the first
time in forever. And, believe me, I understand how soul crushing
it is to deal with severe, chronic illness in someone close to you.
But just as many impulsive confessions I regretted. Usually because
they led to unwanted consequences—a loss of liberty or the initiation of an intervention I wasn’t seeking, or a sudden social or
professional distancing, the way you’d shrink from someone snuffling on a bus. But also because in my most selfish moments I didn’t
consider what the confession that brought me relief would do to
the person on the receiving end. Even if they didn’t shun me or call
the cops, I caused them distress and made them feel obliged to fix
something that wasn’t theirs to fix. (My psychiatrist would tell me
to chill, that helping someone at an excruciatingly shitty point in
their life can itself feel empowering, can be “egosyntonic”—reinforcing the person you want to be. But my god I quail at the thought
of burdening people with my misery. Maybe I shouldn’t.)
People bemoan the paucity of people coming forward about their
mental illness. But have you ever tried talking frankly with a friend,
colleague, relative about your endless despondency, your pit of
despair, your incessant desire for oblivion? The disincentive from

Stigma and Related Bullshit

177

talking to anyone but your psychiatrist about your mental state is
enormous. I’m the first to admit I isolated myself preventatively.
Because fuck if that wasn’t a trillion times better than having people
ghost on me—grow irritable or terse or silent in conversation; leave
calls, texts, emails unanswered.
In fairness, much or all of this was probably in my head. That’s
how a negative cognitive bias works. But imagined or not, it is
misery-making.
The result is threefold:
You learn to interact with others as little as possible.
When you do interact, you disclose as little as possible about
your affective state.
When you do disclose, whether out of trust or obligation, you
learn to couch despair in something safer—pithy pissiness
works well.

So the ice stays unbroken. Thickens, if anything. And the conviction you’re actually horrible for other people makes an even greater
case for self-annihilation.
I have more photos shot from inside my apartment than anyone
living alone in a five-hundred-square-foot space with one window
should ever have. I talk to the radio and to podcasts. Apologize when
dropping or knocking over household objects. Chide contumacious
hard drives, internet connections, appliances. A crazy cat lady with no
cats. This makes being in places with other people even worse because
I can’t shake the habit of talking to myself, my computer, my phone. I
laugh it off when colleagues murmur, “Anna, sitting beside you is so
entertaining,” inwardly thinking I shouldn’t be around human beings.
Being a shut-in also gives you convenient access to a demarcated
pacing area. If I don’t develop a cardiovascular illness brought on by
a fatally sedentary lifestyle it’ll be thanks to pacing. That, and handwringing—both major medals in the Neurotic Olympics.
∙∙∙

178

Anna Mehler Paperny

It’s str iking how power ful a factor shame was—is—in
worsening my worst moments, making pits of despair inescapable
traps. If self-loathing or insides made of lead kept me immovable in
bed in the morning, shame kept me from reaching for my phone
when I reached consciousness to email my boss and call in sick,
shame made me dread my workplace. Shame kept me at work later
to make up for these absences, which further messed up my nights
and doomed my mornings. Shame and fear of appearing a slacker
stopped me from telling my boss I would have to dash out to an
afternoon medical appointment, so I was late or canceled altogether
(in my defense, the latter only ever happened once). Shame stopped
me from bugging my doctor or my friends when I was at home
steeped in misery. Shame, horror at the prospect of ever having to
face the world again, let alone having to face it and to face up to myself
again and again for what could be the better part of a century, propelled me closer to death than anything else ever did.
Pro tip: Don’t sob on things you can’t machine wash. Learn how
to fucking blow your nose and wipe your eyes without getting mucus
everywhere.

M ich elle
Some people are better at harnessing the support of those closest
to them to get through periods of shit. But it was easier for Michelle
Yan to tell her cousins she was gay than it was to tell them she was
depressed. “For the longest time, I wouldn’t be able to say it. . . . It
was difficult to admit to them what was happening,” she tells me
in the café of a north Toronto mall. And when she worked up the
courage to tell them she discovered psychic pain among just about
everyone else in her family. “But it was never talked about.” 7
Not in her family. Not to strangers, not to friends, not to those
with whom you shared a gene pool and a home. You kept face by
keeping silent. Michelle got good at keeping silent. She had realized

Stigma and Related Bullshit

179

in college that what seemed a questioning sexual uncertainty in
high school was a sexual orientation, but she didn’t tell her family,
and it wasn’t until weeks before she and her long-term girlfriend
planned to move in together that Michelle told her mom she was gay.
“I very clearly remember where I was when I told her—in her
bedroom. And at first she didn’t really understand what I was talking about. And then when it kicked in she was like, ‘That’s not
possible.’ . . . She was devastated.”
Coming out and moving out didn’t make Michelle feel any less
torn between the family she loved and the woman she was in love
with. She agonized over her mom’s response to her sexuality and
struggled to explain to her girlfriend why she couldn’t just tell her
parents to accept her or fuck off. “She’s like, ‘You told her. She needs
to deal with it on her own now.’ And I’m like, ‘I understand, but in
my culture I’m very respectful toward my parents.’”
Michelle blamed herself for her mom’s pain, for her girlfriend’s
frustration, for her own mercurial emotions that now flew out of her
control, sent her bawling or yelling without warning. Even though
Michelle was the primary breadwinner and caregiver while her girlfriend searched for a better job, she felt she was failing everyone she
cared about most.
“We would have fights. I would threaten myself. . . . Did I want to
hurt myself? I think I had serious thoughts of doing it.”
She and her girlfriend broke up. Michelle moved back in with her
mother. “I just completely fell apart. . . . We’d gone through so much
in order for us to be together, and it had taken so long to come out
to my parents, her parents. So I just thought, ‘This is it, this is the
be-all and end-all, for ever and ever,’” Michelle said. “And I was just
like, I don’t know what my life is now: My life was with her. There
was no direction. . . . I couldn’t see a future.”
She saw a therapist, who suggested Michelle was going through
depression. “I didn’t want to admit it at first. I was like, what does
that say about me? . . . Who would want to deal with somebody
who has these types of issues? Just stacking guilt on pressure on

180

Anna Mehler Paperny

self-blame.” But ultimately, a friend going through similar angst
made her see her own suffering for what it was. “He forced me to
actually talk about what was going on in my head.” And they’d rely
on each other, each reality checking the other’s self-recrimination.
“And that helped me, tremendously, in terms of being able to pull
out of depression.”

On top of everything else, depression has had a gender problem. When psychiatrists were delineating it as a mood disorder they
reverse-engineered a reification—recruited people they thought
were depressed and decided their symptoms were the symptoms of
depression. But the people they thought were depressed were predominantly women. In part because they excluded people with
addictions (which many men have), and in part because they just
associated what they thought of as depression with women more
than men. Vicious circle: because the people they included in their
studies defining depression were overwhelmingly women, they then
decided depression was an illness that overwhelmingly affected
women. They created a set of symptoms in line with what they saw
in women, and identified it using emotional language that women
were socialized to use more readily.8
Creating a disease that pathologizes women, ignores men, and
adheres to cookie-cutter gender norms reverberates today: Women
still compose the majority of the people diagnosed with depression
and we still don’t know how much of this disparity is due to the
skewed way we started off defining depression or the self-reported
way we diagnose it or the divergent ways mood disorders attack
different people. Either women are more vulnerable to the maw of
despair than men or we’re doing something wrong in identifying
those in its grip. Disproportionately pathologizing women bodes ill,
and we’ve sure as hell seen it as a method of subjugation before.
But perhaps more damagingly, in the twenty-first century, this
also likely means men in crisis aren’t getting care. We tend not to

Stigma and Related Bullshit

181

see depression in dudes. In reporting out this book I had a hard
time finding men willing to talk to me about their struggles with
depression—men of color, most of all. Gary Newman, a case worker
in Toronto who spent his life working with troubled young black
men, had to pause and think when I asked if he knew of anyone
who might want to talk to me: In all his years doing community
work, he hadn’t encountered anyone who’d been diagnosed with
depression. “That’s odd and speaks volumes,” he said.9
The fact that men are more likely than women to kill themselves
only muddies matters further. Society has created a damaging
gendered dichotomy that exists outside humans’ actual proclivity
for dead-end despair.

M ich a el
In the most marginalized and in the most successful we miss depression when it’s staring us in the face.
When you hear someone say, “He had it all,” the archetype you
picture probably looks a lot like Lisa’s older brother Michael. He was
a superstar attorney with a beautiful wife, three beautiful kids, beautiful dogs in a beautiful house in Atlanta. Addicted only to his phone.
“He was an athlete, he skied, he ran, he was a great son. A phenomenal brother. . . . Every role he did he was extraordinary. That’s why
this was such an unbelievable shock,” Lisa said. “He was fearless.”10
No one really believed he could have crippling depression. Not
Michael himself or the doctors and therapists he saw. Not his wife,
who couldn’t reconcile this with the man she knew. Michael
bounced between therapists and doctors and medications, “a whole
array of different mood stabilizers,” none of which seemed to work.
“He got good care. He had good insurance, he had the money.”
He checked himself in to residential treatment programs—the
Houston-based Menninger Clinic; a ranch in the Midwest; a facility near Los Angeles. “He didn’t relate to the people,” Lisa said. In

182

Anna Mehler Paperny

these places, too, Michael’s high-achieving success worked against
him. Being surrounded by people wracked by addiction and isolation along with their depression made him feel he didn’t belong,
didn’t need that kind of care. “I think sometimes they feel like they
don’t necessarily identify with these other people, because they don’t
have the same problem.”
When Michael returned early from a stint at the Menninger
Clinic “he came home feeling good, like he was helping other people
there. A little bit of a manic thing, he thinks he’s helping other people
and he doesn’t really need to be there. He thought he was fine. And
I think they, even, somehow, thought it was OK for him to leave,”
Lisa said. “He would be charming, you know? And he had the gift of
gab, and was very convincing. So I think he would fool people. . . .
He was the man that always got dressed, you know? He would put
on his suit and tie when he went to the office.
“Everyone perceived him as the problem-solver. You have a problem? Go to Michael. You need tickets to a football game and can’t
find them? Michael will know someone. . . . Sometimes the people
that are the most successful, they can’t—when they’re used to being
the winner and they’re used to fixing things, and now something is
broken and they can’t fix it, yet they’re doing everything they’re
supposed to—they take their meds, they show up for appointments
and they’re still not getting better, you know? That’s frustrating.”
Lisa calls it Michael’s “non-lethal attempt,” the time he overdosed
on pills and was rushed to the psychiatric ER. Nobody kept him, not
even overnight. She wishes Michael and his nonplussed family had
at least been given a brochure telling them about the risks of suicide
and depression. “When my dog gets his teeth cleaned I get a better
handout. He was in a high-risk category, and nobody bothered to say
that. . . . That first time when he went, when he took the pills, how
did they not take that opportunity? He came in with the family—
why were they not given information?”
This went on for a while. Michael’s degree of despondence ebbed
and flowed. Then a bad cycling accident, followed by closing his law

Stigma and Related Bullshit

183

practice, made life much worse. “That was my brother’s identity. . . .
It was something he’d created.” The final days of Michael’s life were
especially bad. He called his doctor, who upped his antidepressant
dose, but he insisted he didn’t have to go to the hospital.
On the last morning of Michael’s life his wife woke up to find him
gone. He reappeared shortly after, said he’d been out walking. He
looked at her funny—glassy-eyed, Lisa related, “like he wasn’t really
seeing” her. Michael’s wife went back into their bedroom to get the
dog’s leash and he was gone by the time she returned; no sign of him
as she headed out the door with the dog for a walk. The tenth-story
ledge from which he jumped was lined by a railing tall enough to
require concerted effort to climb over. “It’s not like it’s just an edge
where you don’t have a second to think.”
Lisa got the call from her nephew’s wife. “I just stopped in my
tracks. I really don’t remember the rest of the conversation. . . . All
I know is I just started screaming and screaming and screaming.”
She hadn’t spoken to him that weekend. She’d been trying to give
him space after he accused her of feeling sorry for him. “I said, ‘No,
I don’t! I feel bad. . . . I don’t pity you. You’re a winner. You’re going
to be fine.’ I was trying not to smother him.”
Lisa knows what depression looks like: She went through it. She
watched her dad go through it, hours sunk motionless into a living
room chair. “I never really saw Michael like that. Because of who he
was, as a person, nobody—I never—it was the biggest shock in my
life. . . . You think the people who would kill themselves would be
the lonely people, who don’t have any money, don’t have anything
to live for. My brother had everything.”

19
Through the Cracks
Brian David Geisheimer died on the train tracks near the bank of the
Fraser River’s twisting route through the Lower Mainland on its way
from the Rockies to the Pacific. It would have been well after dark as
he picked his way through the December night across the highway,
a two-lane stretch passing houses on big lots and a low-slung motel
nearby, through a thin stand of trees to reach the tracks themselves.
But he’d been missing from the psych ward since late morning.
We know he died at 9:03 p.m.—a precision made possible by
freight scheduling, which shows exactly what time the train reached
him. “Multiple blunt force injury” is what they call it when a loco­
motive smashes into you at high speed.
Sebastien Pavit Abdi’s time of death is less exact: THere’s a twohour window during which the nineteen-year-old hanged himself,
asphyxiating to death in his family home.
That same late April day, several hours earlier, Sarah Louise
Charles threw herself to her death from her apartment ten stories up.
All three died within a four-month period in 2014 and 2015. All
killed themselves within hours of leaving, against medical advice,
the same psychiatric ward at Abbotsford Regional Hospital near
Vancouver, British Columbia, where they were supposed to have
been receiving care and kept safe from their own overwhelming
desire for death.

Through the Cracks

185

An inquest into their deaths found the hospital needed better
protocols for assessing risk and for following through on those
assessments, especially when the risk is high. It called on the health
authority to improve its Code Yellow protocol, the code used for
when a patient absconds, to quicken communication, tailor urgency
to risk level, coordinate better with security guards, get police to
ping the person’s cell phone right away. To ensure, on discharge,
that “the patient is not being rereleased into an environment that
contains all of the same stressors that brought on acute care.” 1 This
seems at once intuitive and tricky, and it involves a therapeutically
effective transition from inpatient to outpatient care that should be
a matter of course but in reality rarely happens. The inquest also
recommended mandatory “training and retraining” of mental health
professionals in suicide risk assessment. According to a response
sent to the coroner in the fall of 2018, Fraser Health has acted on
several of these recommendations, including piloting standardized
suicide screening, developing policies for sharing information with
families, and requesting funding to improve its patient release and
transition process.2
Even if your patients don’t walk out the door and kill themselves
it isn’t uncommon to lose them in the transition between inpatient
and outpatient care. About a third of people discharged from psychiatric hospitals in Ontario see neither family doctor nor psychiatrist within a month of discharge. That could easily have been me,
leaving hospital after a suicide attempt without so much as a followup appointment. By contrast, the vast majority of people discharged
with a congestive heart failure diagnosis see their family doctor, a
cardiologist, or another specialist within a month, Paul Kurdyak tells
me in his downtown office overlooking the Spadina streetcar line.
It’s no surprise, then, that one in ten people hospitalized for depression will be back in hospital for the same reason within a month. “It’s
a terrible patient outcome,” he says, and it’s like he’s seeing in his
mind’s eye all these people lost to care. “But also, we’re spending
thousands of dollars on hospitalization [and] having one in four to

186

Anna Mehler Paperny

one in three people drop off a cliff. . . . This is a ridiculous, wasteful
scenario. But it’s pretty common.” 3
In her work at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
brain bank, Melanie Bose’s postmortem detective work digging
into brain donors’ psychological pathologies gives her a rearview
glimpse at all the missed medical connections—records of hospital
discharges with no indication of a follow-up appointment; therapeutic fits and starts with no lasting treatment. She has seen those cracks
up close, in her work at a psychiatric hospital almost two decades
earlier. It’s not enough to schedule a follow-up appointment when
someone is discharged (which not every hospital does anyway). “It
depends on how motivated the person is to seek treatment, how
much they like the provider, how close they are to their house,
[whether] you’re too depressed to have the energy.” You need more
of a nudge. “Just sending a brief message in the mail, you know, after
a certain amount of time, they’ve shown that practice actually leads
to lowered risk.” 4
Yes. A mailout, so that along with flyers for pizza and realtors and
gym memberships is a little note saying, “Hey, how are you doing?
We hope you’re OK. If not, if you have questions or want to chat, give
us a shout or drop by. Here’s the phone number, the address, the
hours. Here’s how to reach us by transit.”
I’ve gotten snail mail asking for donations to hospitals that had
discharged me weeks earlier. The literal least they could do is include
a little “Hey, are you thinking of killing yourself?” note.
It’s easy to imagine that people who die preventable deaths were
far removed from the protective embrace of society, outside the
reach of any safety net—beyond help. That’s a comforting lie: Before
people kill themselves, before they deteriorate, self-isolate, become
incapacitated ciphers, they have family and friends and colleagues.
Most, even when their illness begins to hijack and torment their
brains, do interact with the institutions whose purpose is to get them
well. Brian Ahmedani—director of behavioral health services
research at the Henry Ford Health System in Detroit, who was smart

Through the Cracks

187

and kind and generous with his time—tugged threads backward to
look at the histories of people who’d killed themselves and found
that 83 percent of the 5,894 people in eight states he tracked over a
ten-year period had contact with the health care system in the year
before they killed themselves; half in their final twenty-eight days.
One-fifth had a mental health–related visit in the four weeks before
they killed themselves but most had no indication of a mental health
problem in any health visit over that period of time. Everyone in the
study had health insurance. All were “patients in well-resourced
health systems.” All took their own lives.5
What strikes Ahmedani isn’t the close and frequent contact that
people sucked into despair have had with the health system—“often
people reach out for help right before a suicide attempt”—what
strikes him is the way the system missed them. And of the myriad
ways to lose people to treatable conditions, perhaps the most basic
is when they’re right in front of you. People are going untreated not
because they aren’t seeking medical care but because clinicians aren’t
really seeing the patient. And that’s huge.6
“That, to me, is the most surprising thing,” he tells me by phone.
“They’re reaching out—almost everyone’s making some sort of
visit—but either people aren’t presenting symptoms right before
they die, and it’s just very impulsive, or we’re just completely missing it. And I suspect it’s a little bit of both.”
This is where the Zero Suicide strategy comes in. Pioneered in
the early 2000s at the Henry Ford Health System where Ahmedani
is doing his groundbreaking research, it focuses on catching people
at risk of suicide who are already in a health system. The version that’s
now being adopted around the world has seven components: to lead
like you mean it; to train your workforce to spot and mitigate suicide
risk; to screen, at every opportunity, for that risk, and to build those
screenings into your workflow; to engage people at risk with safety
plans where they outline what they’ll do if shit gets real; to treat
suicidality with care that’s been shown to work; to transition people
in a way that ensures they don’t fall through the cracks between

188

Anna Mehler Paperny

inpatient and outpatient, between one clinician and another; and to
track your progress and improve upon it.7
Sounds obvious. It isn’t.
“It really became, in my view, quite transformational for the
department in how we thought about care,” said Cathrine Frank,
chair of Psychiatry and Behavioral Health at Henry Ford. “When
we set the goal there was pushback from our staff. . . . ‘How could
you set a goal that is impossible?’ People worried about lawsuits; they
worried about not being able to deal with it. And when you really
came to look at it, well, if zero isn’t the goal what would the goal be?
It’s my relative, your friend, your teacher. It became transformational
as we talked about it.” 8
Brian Ahmedani also underscores the need to screen for depression and suicide in all kinds of health encounters, because most
people who kill themselves won’t have gotten mental health care
but will have gotten some other kind of care in the year before they
die. If you don’t look out for them in other health realms, he told
me, they’re lost.
This assumes the patient you’re screening for suicide is willing to
talk to you about their desire to die. Before my first attempt and in
the weeks following, I certainly wouldn’t have told anyone. I didn’t
trust clinicians. I didn’t trust myself. I didn’t believe my wish for
oblivion was treatable, so why put myself through well-meaning
interventions when honesty could very well get me locked in a hospital? I’ve gotten better at acknowledging and talking about my desire
for death and attempts to fulfill it, but I’ve never been more intent
on denying my suicidality than while deepest in its grip and most
intent on following through.
Maybe the tired-eyed psychiatrist who assessed me that first
Saturday morning in the psych ER, who didn’t know I’d been brought
in against my will, who discharged me with a prescription for sleeping pills I overdosed on the next day, maybe she wasn’t seeing the suicidal person in front of her. Or maybe I was dissembling too well—so
intent on breaking free I convinced even myself that I was fine.

Through the Cracks

189

“The hardest ones to treat are the ones who’ve just made a decision and they aren’t going to give you a clue about their plan,” Jane
Pearson, the head of Adult Preventive Intervention and chair of the
Suicide Research Consortium at NIMH, tells me over the phone—
she’s among those at the forefront of tackling and somehow slowing
or reversing the freaky spike in American suicides. “Fortunately,
that’s not the majority of people.” 9
When she says screening should be everywhere, she means it.
Even when the person you’re broaching it with is a child. “People are
really scared when kids talk about this. And then they’re like, ‘Does
this kid really know what they’re saying?’ . . . So the challenge here
is trying to identify that risk and understand it more.”

Fa mily physicians ar e supposed to be your first point of
contact for depression just like anything else. That’s why it’s called
primary care.
So it’s imperative family doctors know how to diagnose and treat
mental illness, how to assess when their patients need specialized
care, and how to connect them to that care. But when it comes to
severe mental illness, they may not have the knowledge and familiarity they need, says Mark Olfson, a psychiatrist at Columbia University,
when I bug him with questions. “When you survey primary care doctors and you ask them which specialty they have the hardest time
referring patients to, or have the hardest time identifying resources
for, mental health comes to the top of the list,” he says. “They’re not
set up to provide the level of intensity and the specialization of treatment that a lot of these more complex problems demand.” 10
Then there’s the money question. Family doctors often lack the
financial incentives to take the time to deal with complex, challenging, miserable patients.
Most health systems in both Canada and the US are based on a
fee-for-service model, which means your family doc has an incentive
to see as many patients as possible. The more patients in, or the more

190

Anna Mehler Paperny

discrete tasks performed, the more money they make. They’re also
flooded with patients sporting an array of maladies, from sniffles to
sepsis. It’s tough to take time to probe someone’s psyche, let alone
attempt psychotherapy.
That’s not a good enough excuse, Brian Ahmedani tells me. If
someone comes in for a cold and screens positive for suicide, “what’s
the most important condition there? Should we really be all that
worried about a cold if four days later a person’s not going to be alive
anymore?”
And once you do the clinical questioning and someone screens
positive for depression or suicidality, what then? In many jurisdictions, you’re in trouble. Your patient’s in a system ill equipped to help
them, that only has resources for the well-resourced.

Javed Alloo’s ethnically, culturally, linguistically diverse
patient population in north Toronto has worse access to mental
health care now, the family doctor figures, than they’ve had in fifteen
years. I spoke with him about how he gets his complex patients care,
as a family doctor, and it’s alarming to hear he often can’t.
“It’s honestly so bad now, it’s scary. It’s worlds worse.” His frustration is palpable. “A decade or so ago, I could get someone in to see
a psychiatrist in two weeks if I needed to.” Now, if he has a patient
who needs to see a specialist, “it’s pretty much: I’m going to be seeing
you for the next eight months because there’s nobody else who’s
going to be able to see you.” 11 Or he’s had patients referred back to
him after spending a week as psychiatric inpatients—individuals
“who were well beyond my capacity of care. . . . Even reading the
psychiatrist’s notes, I can see the challenges they’re facing. And
they’re like, ‘OK, now I’m transferring this patient back to you.”
About half his patients have coverage that pays for at least some
private psychotherapy; the other half is essentially out of luck. He
rarely refers patients to see psychiatrists or counselors on an out­
patient basis “because [the specialists] don’t have the capacity.”

Through the Cracks

191

When his patients’ problems are beyond his scope but he can’t refer
them elsewhere in this fiscal year or even the next, he subs out the specialization he can’t provide for the sense of stability he can. “Knowing
that they have something . . . helps the safety feeling, internally.”
Javed Alloo attributes his focus on patients with mental illness
to his rotation in a psychiatric hospital in Kingston, Ontario, early
in his career, and his work years later in an urgent care clinic. It made
him revise his idea of professional success. One of the soul-­destroying
things about caring for someone with a chronic condition is that you
never win. Even if your patient achieves remission, depression’s
specter never fully dissipates. Much of the time you’re just trying to
prevent irreversible decline. Maybe you can alleviate a heartbeat’s
worth of agony. Maybe you can help a family deal with someone
who’ll never get better. So your goal (to use an alliteration clinicians
love) becomes “care rather than cure.” Alloo remembers his grandfather having talks about death with all the grandchildren at a very
young age, and how those talks helped him learn to accept early on
what he can’t change, and tackle all he can.
“The expectations of what you’ve achieved, what you’re looking
for as a win, changes. And as long as you can perceive the win differently, then you can say, ‘This is worth my effort.’”
He figures most family physicians feel comfortable managing “relatively simpler cases of depression and suicidality.” It’s when people
don’t respond to first-, second-, even third-line treatment; when they
relapse repeatedly to the point where day-to-day functioning is
impaired, that he needs backup from someone with more expertise.
And that’s where things often fall apart.

20
Mental Health Is for Rich People
As far as national chauvinisms go, Canada loves being The One
with Universal Health Care. But if your illness is in your brain, that
universality is a lie.
In theory, in Canada, psychotherapy is paid for with public
dollars if you get it from a doctor—a family doctor or a psychiatrist
or similar. I was mind-meltingly fortunate to have a psychiatrist I
first saw as an inpatient and who continues to see me as an outpatient, whose invaluable sessions are covered by Ontario’s public
health care system. In practice, that seldom happens, and psychologists and other therapists aren’t covered. People who lack private
insurance or can’t afford to pay out of pocket are out of luck.
In the years following the implementation of the Affordable Care
Act, a higher percentage of Americans had something resembling
adequate drug and psychotherapy coverage than Canadians.1 North
of the longest loosely guarded border in the world, unless you are
extremely old or extremely poor or have your own plan (through your
employer, for example), drugs tend not to be covered. Psychotherapy
tends not to be covered, and when it is, it’s near-unattainable. The
only thing public dollars consistently pay for is crisis care—the
costliest, least efficacious way to treat any kind of mental disorder.
Post-crisis, post-discharge, you’re on your own, and chances are good
you’ll end up needing urgent intervention again shortly.

Mental Health Is for Rich People

193

All too often, in both Canada and the United States, if you don’t
have cash, mental health care isn’t there.
This is often true even if you have insurance: THe kind of coverage you have can determine what happens to you when you show up
at the emergency room, Mark Olfson, the thoughtful Columbia
University psychiatrist, told me. People on Medicaid, the insurance
provided to low-income Americans, are more likely to be discharged
and sent home; people with private insurance are more likely to
get mental health evaluations in the emergency room and are more
likely to be admitted.2
But this may be an indication of the resources available in the
places people are accessing care rather than an indictment of doctors giving different attention to people based on their means. “The
Medicaid people,” Olfson tells me, “are probably going to hospitals
in areas of the country where there are very few inpatient beds and
there are long lines and so forth. And they’re sent home, sometimes
without even getting a mental health evaluation. So they’re getting
a lower level of care for what’s ostensibly the same thing. I don’t think
it’s the individual doctor saying, ‘Well, if you have Medicaid I’m not
going to provide you with a mental health evaluation.’ That’s not the
way doctors operate. But they do operate in environments where
they have varying numbers of demands on their time. They end up
practicing in very different ways.” 3
Inequitable insurance coverage can shaft you as an outpatient as
well. In the United States, psychiatrists are significantly less likely than
other medical specialists to accept any kind of insurance—private or
public. The greater your financial need the less likely it is that the psychiatrist nearest you will take whatever coverage you have. Just over
half of American psychiatrists accept private insurance; but just 43 percent accept Medicaid—far lower than for nonpsychiatric clinicians.
And psychiatrists are less likely to accept insurance than they were a
decade ago.4 That means you either have to pay cash or go elsewhere.
“That’s a really huge problem,” Maria Oquendo, past president of
the American Psychiatric Association and chair of psychiatry at the

194

Anna Mehler Paperny

University of Pennsylvania’s Perelman School of Medicine, tells me
when I call her, seeking clarity. In many cases, she adds, it’s because
insurers undervalue behavioral health care, reimbursing psychiatrists so little it isn’t worth their time. “An insurer here in Philadelphia
pays $44 for a ten-minute consultation. You can’t get a plumber to
show up for that, you know what I mean? So it puts doctors in a very
difficult bind.” 5
Mental health care is what economists call “price sensitive”—cost
changes, even small ones, can determine whether you get it or not.
“It’s an interesting dynamic,” Tim Bruckner, who is an epidemiologist and public health professor, tells me in his office at the University of California, Irvine, where I’d sought him out because of his
work on how public health measures change who gets or needs what
kind of care. “If you break your arm it doesn’t really matter what
the cost of the X-ray is: You’re basically going [to the hospital to get
one]. If the price of antidepressants drops by 10 percent, or psychi­
atric care drops, you seek more care.” 6 That price includes travel, wait
times, and myriad indignities and inconveniences that can deter
people from getting care for their minds that they otherwise might.
Variable quality of mental health care can be an issue in public
systems, too. Barely half of the 108,000 British Columbians in Professor Joseph Puyat’s study at the University of British Columbia,
all of whom had a depression diagnosis for which they were receiving public health care, received “minimally adequate” treatment.
Even if you get your foot in the door, poorer people are more likely
to get “poor or under-treatment by any published standard.” 7
So that’s bad.
On top of everything else, you need to learn to make a fuss. If
you don’t, no matter how your care’s paid for—private insurance,
public insurance, out of pocket—you may get passed over or rushed
through when you need something more. If my parents hadn’t pushed
for a second opinion that, frankly, I didn’t want, I’d have been discharged post-suicide attempt with negligible follow-up. Being pushy
takes determination and time and a degree of confidence in the

Mental Health Is for Rich People

195

system and your place in it. People who are marginalized in other
aspects of their lives—by race, by income, by language, by immigration status—are less likely to have that confidence.
And the people least able to haggle effectively are those with the
most severe mental illness—either because they lack the wherewithal to do so or they don’t think anything will make them better
or they simply don’t believe they deserve care. Or because their haggling isn’t effective—it’s easy to dismiss a crazy person’s kvetching
no matter how justified. I’ve spoken to so many people who felt they
weren’t heard, weren’t listened to when making concerns known.
I’ve been in that position, talking to a nurse’s receding back. It’s a
great way to deny meaningful care in the short term and ensure it
won’t be sought in the long term.
So you give up. You get sicker. You don’t know whom to call,
where to turn to advocate for yourself when you can’t get an appointment with someone who’ll treat you. Maybe things get bad enough
you end up in a psychiatric ER and maybe you get some helpful treatment there but chances are you get no follow-up afterward.
More psychiatrists would help but that wouldn’t be enough: A study
that Paul Kurdyak authored from Toronto in 2014 found that psychiatrists in urban areas—where they’re most highly concentrated—tend
to keep seeing the same few patients rather than taking in new ones.
Psychiatrists in Toronto saw 57 percent fewer new outpatients than
psychiatrists in areas with a far smaller supply of shrinks per capita.8
“A small number of people have access to that kind of intensive service [that psychiatrists in urban areas offer] and many more are
making do with either nothing or primary care,” he tells me.9
I am an abashed beneficiary of this service inequity: Living in
Toronto, I see my psychiatrist as an outpatient on a weekly basis.
This luxury no doubt steals time that could otherwise go to sick
people waiting weeks or months to see someone. But I like seeing my
psychiatrist on a regular basis. If the goal is my continuing to function and work and not die, I need to—these appointments are the
only thing consistently giving me hope.

196

Anna Mehler Paperny

Should there be visit frequency limits? Different pay scales?
Psychiatrists designated as intake physicians for new patients? Would
it help if psychiatrists were more closely associated with hospitals?
Jury’s still out on that. Ontario tried to incentivize psychiatrists to
see more urgent patients by offering a bonus to those who’ll see
patients who’ve recently been discharged from hospital or tried to
kill themselves. But results were mixed. And according to Kurdyak:
“Collectively, we have a responsibility to meet a need.”
He’d like to see clustered mental health care teams combining
practitioners from different disciplines, with a triage-like structure
in place to determine who goes where to get what care, and where
they go next.
South of the border, Michael Schoenbaum, as a senior adviser
on the economics of mental care at the National Institute of Mental
Health (NIMH), has been pushing Collaborative Care. I called him
at the suggestion of NIMH’s Jane Pearson. “Everyone says they
collaborate; that’s not what this means.” 10
Schoenbaum comes at mental health care as an economist, trying
to get his head around why we keep failing at getting basic, necessary interventions to people who need them.
“We have these existing treatments that are a lot better than nothing, even if they are not everything we would want them to be. But
quite a high fraction of people with depression don’t receive anything.”
Right now, your family doctor diagnoses you with depression,
sends you home with an antidepressant prescription. Maybe you’re
instructed to come back if things get worse. How much worse is
worse? What if worse means losing the will to bug people to help you
halt and reverse that spiral? Initiating an intervention and then leaving the person being intervened upon to their own devices is bad in
any field of health care, Schoenbaum says, but it’s especially bad in
a condition characterized by floundering in isolation and a reluctance
or inability to seek help. “This traditional medical model of, you
know, tell the patient what to do and then leave it to the patient to
come back and self-identify if they’re having a problem and ask for

Mental Health Is for Rich People

197

something different, just works really badly.” In his model, someone
follows up. A health care coordinator—someone who doesn’t need
to be an MD or even a health specialist—calls you a few weeks after
your initial appointment to see how you’re doing—confirming you
filled the prescription or followed up on whatever else was prescribed, confirming you’re taking it as directed, that it’s working,
that the side effects are tolerable. “If the patient isn’t getting better,
again, you reach out to the patient, say, ‘Look, we started you on this
thing. We need to do better: THis isn’t working for you. Let’s bring
you back in.’”
And perhaps more important than that patient-clinician liaison
is a clinician-clinician link. Doctors talking to each other. That’s the
idea behind Collaborative Care.
In principle, right now, when a general practitioner feels they’re
in over their head in treating a particular patient’s malady, they’ll
refer that patient to a specialist for a consult. Sometimes, a clinician
will hesitate to do that because they don’t know when they’re in over
their head or, far more likely, because they know the patient will
spend months waiting for that consult. Many nonspecialists are
hesitant to even ask if you want to die if they don’t know where they’ll
send you if the answer is affirmative. The idea behind Collaborative
Care is that if you’re a family doctor you can call up your psychiatrist
colleague—maybe even walk down the hall and chat in person—
and ask about your patient’s case, whether you should switch meds
or try something else, whether what you thought was unipolar
depression could be bipolar. It could mean problems are caught early;
it would save money and improve outcomes. Models of this exist in
little bits throughout the continent: family health teams, collaborative care units, whatever you want to call them. In Ontario you can
bill for calling another doctor for advice and for providing that guidance. Governments like to tout such models as indications of innovative health spending but they remain the exception, not the rule.
Right now, phone-a-colleague is not on the list of many health
payers’ billable items. As Michael Schoenbaum said, “Most insurers

198

Anna Mehler Paperny

don’t and wouldn’t cover this specialty consultation between the
primary care team and the psychiatrist.”
It’s a potential starting point, though—a health system with crucial connective tissue between doctor and patient, doctor and doctor.
We need more, and more accessible, psychiatrists, both to provide
expertise and to provide care for those people whose problems are
more complex.
And if you don’t want mental wellness to remain the purview of
the privileged, if you don’t want poverty to doom people to debilitating anguish, you need to cover pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy
like you mean it. Universally. For everyone.11

21
Trying to Heal the Littlest Minds
Societies have a thing about children. They are precious bringers of
the future, and the seat of all our anxieties. Are parents doing too
much, or too little? Are teachers being too demanding, or not
demanding enough? We fret over the ways they spend or don’t spend
their free time, and what they do or don’t do with the latest technology available to them, be it video games or computers or cell phones
or smartphones. Somehow, something is ruining a generation.
So it is with mental illness, where the specter of crazy-sick kids
looms large. Every year, more than three thousand North American
children, teens, and adolescents kill themselves. Tens of thousands
more try. The US Centers for Disease Control’s annual survey of highschool students found that 8.6 percent of teens said they had tried to
kill themselves. Girls were more than twice as likely as boys (11.6 percent compared to 5.5 percent).1
And the death toll, for youth, is rising. Suicide rates among
twenty- to twenty-four-year-olds increased 35 percent; twentyfive- to twenty-nine-year-olds, 34 percent. The rate for fifteen- to
nineteen-year-olds increased 75 percent. The suicide rate for tento fourteen-year-olds more than doubled between 2007 and 2017.
America’s overall suicide rate increased about 26 percent between
2007 and 2017. A big jump, to be sure. But not the spike we’re seeing
with youth.2

20 0

Anna Mehler Paperny

The rise in youth suicide is shocking the world’s suicide researchers and those caring for the suicidal.
“We are flabbergasted, to be quite honest,” Arielle Sheftall, a
research scientist at Nationwide Children’s Hospital in Columbus,
Ohio, admits over the phone. “When you look at the percentages in
ten- to fourteen-year-olds, it has so significantly increased to the
point where you go, ‘Whoa, this is bad.’ And in females, specifically,
it’s skyrocketed.” 3
Especially disturbing is her finding among the littlest attempters of suicide. The idea of a twelve-year-old taking their life churns
your gut, turns it cold. So the very idea of someone as young as
five or six killing themselves defies my conceptualization—even
if (the good news) suicide rates among the youngest children are
vanishingly small—measured in per-million, as opposed to per–
hundred thousand for other age groups. But “it breaks my heart
every time I talk about it. We like to think kids at that age are prospering: THey’re just starting school, they’re becoming their own
individuals.”
But it happens. Kids kill themselves.
Her research found rates rising dramatically among black kids
even as they fell among white ones.
We don’t know why but we can hypothesize, she says. It could be
because black children are more likely to be exposed to the kind of
violence or trauma that can put them at increased risk of self-inflicted
death. It could be caregivers’ reluctance to seek help from institutions that have historically betrayed their trust. But this is a field
of research we don’t know enough about because the necessary
resources have not been put in place to explore it.

Everyone has a theory about what’s behind the rise in child
and youth suicide broadly.
Madelyn Gould, an epidemiologist in psychiatry at Columbia
University, tells me she worries about shifting norms—that kids see

Trying to Heal the Littlest Minds

201

suicide as an option now when they didn’t before. Decades ago,
“You might be depressed, you might have serious psychiatric problems, but people wouldn’t kill themselves. It happened, but it was
still rare.” 4
It’s easy to blame the media. It’s easy to blame social media. It’s
easy to blame shows like 13 Reasons Why, a Netflix series chronicling
a high schooler’s suicide (which I’ve never seen nor want to see) in
which, as Gould says, “help-seeking wasn’t accessible but dying by
suicide was very accessible.”
Norms matter. Her research shows that youth who think their
peers have considered or attempted suicide are more likely to consider or attempt themselves.
Options matter. She has a problem with coverage that doesn’t
emphasize—to kids and caregivers—that there’s help (whether help
is actually available, as we’ve seen, obviously depends).
But the truth is, no one knows for sure what’s driving this increase
across the board that’s especially pronounced among the youngest
suicide victims, Arielle Sheftall points out.
“People will say a number of things—‘It’s social media, it’s this,
it’s that’ and people want to grab on to these things and believe that
they’re the culprits, but we don’t know. We don’t know. And I don’t
want to say, ‘Yup, it’s all Facebook,’ because we don’t know that’s
the case.”
One thing she wants to drive home, that she repeats a couple of
times during our conversation, is the need to pay attention to kids’
disclosures of suicidal thoughts—no matter how jokey or flippant
they seem. “Statements like, ‘Oh, I just want to die’ may come off as
‘funny,’ quote-unquote, but the kid might really mean that. And if
we don’t address that, how can we get them the help they need?”
People are afraid to have those conversations with anyone, let
alone a little kid. Shit, I’d be terrified of mentioning it. Arielle Sheftall
says I shouldn’t be. Maybe I’d be more likely to do so, though, if I
knew what to do if the answer was affirmative. Jane Pearson, the suicide-prevention expert with NIMH, has said primary care clinicians

202

Anna Mehler Paperny

are more likely to ask if you’re suicidal if they know where to send
you if you say yes, and I don’t doubt it’s the same, if not more so, for
the layperson.5

It’s bad for youth, and it’s especially bad for some kids of color,
but suicidality seems to be worse for LGBTQ youth. Three in ten
queer high-school students attested to having tried to kill themselves in the past year—more than quadruple the rate of straight
students. One in ten made a suicide attempt so serious it needed
medical attention.6 The Centers for Disease Control’s study makes
no mention of trans youth, which is telling. We know trans young
people are also at elevated risk of trying to kill themselves, and evidence suggests similar factors around rejection and discrimination
are at play.7
It’s harder to know for sure whether gender and sexual minorities are more likely to die by suicide; that kind of data tends not to
be collected at the medical examiner level, and studies involving
individual-level psychological autopsies have been inconclusive. But
the relationship between sexual orientation, gender identity, and
non-fatal suicidal behavior is much clearer, and has been found in
North America, Europe, Australasia, and elsewhere.8
I called Ann Haas, a veteran suicidologist with the kind of deep
voice you’d want narrating your documentary, to figure out how it’s
possible that we know so little about the risk of suicide to a group of
people we know to be at heightened risk of trying to kill themselves.
She and her colleagues at the American Foundation for Suicide
Prevention designed a way to ascertain and record a person’s gender
and sexual orientation in death reports, but the catch is you need to
do it in every single death or your records are of little use. And uptake
has been scant.
America remains squeamish about sex and gender to a damaging
degree, she said.
Haas, who is lesbian, found herself drawn to the study of LGBTQ

Trying to Heal the Littlest Minds

203

suicidality—especially among young people—because of what she
saw in her own community.
“I just saw so many people struggling and it seemed like a different pattern—it just never quite seemed like it fit with what we knew
about other groups. And the more I work with these populations the
more convinced I am that there are some very unique factors that are
driving suicidal behavior. And at the same time, we know so little.” 9
Among those factors is discrimination, and the way it erases
your stability and your selfhood. LGBTQ people living in US states
without protections against discrimination reported higher prevalences of mood, anxiety, and substance disorders compared with
straight people in those states or gay people in other states that
boasted better protections.10 A similar trend was found in the wake
of state bans on same-sex marriage following the 1996 Defense of
Marriage Act—even in states that didn’t enact bans themselves but
where homo­phobic rhetoric made itself felt.11
One study of lesbian-, gay-, and bisexual-identifying individuals
in New York City found that while white participants had higher
rates of mood disorders, black and Latino individuals had higher
rates of suicide attempts. This could be because suicide attempts
among queer people of color are more related to external stressors
than internal disorders;12 or it could be because we’re bad at recognizing mood disorders in people who aren’t white.

We’r e scar ed of making kids crazy and we’re scared of giving
kids crazy pills, and in 2004 when the US Food and Drug Administration mandated warning labels on antidepressants cautioning
clinicians that they could make kids want to kill themselves, it reverberated. The fine print of the precipitating analysis,13 which found
an almost doubled prevalence of suicidality among kids on anti­
depressants versus placebo, is worth noting: THe trials included in
the analysis weren’t designed to measure suicide risk; and they
focused on ideation, not attempted or completed suicides.

204

Anna Mehler Paperny

The black box warning and the scary headlines it brought had a significant impact.14 In the years immediately following, anti­depressant
prescribing for kids and adolescents dropped sharply after having risen
for several years, even as the number of self-poisonings with psychotropic drugs rose and other kinds of depression treatment stayed stagnant.15
It would be too simplistic to attribute the spike in youth suicides
to black box warnings fifteen years ago. But if they played even a
small role in making doctors reluctant to treat depression in youth,
that’s damaging.16
There are some risk factors we know about, however.
Childhood trauma is one. A family history of mental illness is
another. And there are ways depression manifests itself in children
that make the adults in their lives more likely to miss it.
More so than adults, young people are responsive to their environments. It means the things happening to them and around them
can help trigger a descent into mental illness. And it means mental
illness may not manifest the way you think it does, which means it
goes unnoticed or is confused with something else, Betsy Kennard,
a researcher and director of Outpatient Psychological Services at UT
Southwestern, informs me over the phone.
“You could have a depressed kid and put him in the computer lab
and he enjoys the computer game so he might not look, to the teacher,
as depressed because he’s smiling and interacting. Or you have a kid
who is maybe irritable and oppositional and your tendency is not to
see that kid as depressed: You see them as maybe being willful and
uncooperative and maybe spoiled.” 17
“Whereas depressed adults tend to have a flat affect—they will
be sad in every different environment—children can show, you
know, positive affect because they’re doing something they like and
then they go back to their routine and they may look depressed.”
And many adults often have a hard time coming to grips with the
possibility that their child is depressed—especially when this little
person they provide for has an objectively easier childhood than they
did themselves.

Trying to Heal the Littlest Minds

205

“Even though there’s been a lot of years of work on childhood
depression, it’s still hard for people to really grasp that a child can
be depressed. . . . It’s hard to see in your child. It’s hard to know what
to do.”

Ther e ar e people about whom the hackneyed phrase “you’re
stronger than you know” feels true. Maybe Marcella, raising daughters on her own on a Navajo reservation in Utah, knows it now. I hope
the kickboxing helped.

M a rcella a nd Br ea nna
By the time Marcella entered her daughter’s room, sixteen-year-old
Breanna was mottled grey-blue.18
It wasn’t unusual for Breanna to stomp into her room in a sudden
jarring rage and lock the door. It was weird, though, that there was
no response when Breanna’s younger sister banged on the door and
yelled, when their Australian shepherd, Jake, whined outside the
bedroom, agitated and disconsolate.
“He kept scratching at her door, he kept trying to crawl underneath the door and he’s just whimpering and running up and down
the hall and then finally he just lay down and didn’t move.”
It was probably around noon when they heard the big thud.
“And that’s when we go back—and we always go back; me and
the girls keep going back to the minute we heard that thud. ‘We
should have done this; we should have done that; why didn’t we do
this,’ you know. And we go back to those woulda-coulda-shouldas.”
Marcella goes back to the moment she finally got fed up and
barged into Breanna’s room, hours after the teen had shut herself
inside. Breanna’s shift at McDonald’s started at three o’clock and
it was unheard of for her, obsessively conscientious, to be late for
work. “I actually was so mad. I was like, ‘What is wrong with you,

20 6

Anna Mehler Paperny

kid?’ I ended up unscrewing the doorknob because for some reason
I didn’t want to break the door down because I didn’t want to spend
$70 on a new door. And that was so stupid for me to even think
about that. I should have broken that door down. Seventy dollars
would have been nothing. And I go back to that.
“I opened the door and that’s when I saw her. She was probably
less than an inch off the floor; just a little bit more and she would
have, she would have made it. . . . ‘You could have just wiggled just
a little bit and you would have hit the floor.’”
Breanna had hanged herself from her closet by a belt her mother’d
never seen before. “I was wondering, like, ‘Where did this belt come
from?’ . . .
“The first emotion I felt when I found her was anger. At her. I
mean, because my mind hadn’t coped with the fact that she’s gone.”
She took out her rage on the contents of her daughter’s room—
everything in the closet, band posters on the wall. “What was the
point of you putting up a poster? What was that whole point if you
were going to do this?”

Five years after her eldest child killed herself Marcella’s pain
has begun to ebb but the image still materializes, unbidden.
“Cutting her down was probably the hardest thing. It comes back
and comes back.”
Everything Marcella didn’t see now throbs, obvious—childhood
trauma, cataclysms of rage, punishing self-recrimination when
Breanna couldn’t meet her own high standards. Breanna had been
sexually assaulted when she was five years old. She started cutting herself at ten. “She would cover up with bracelets and I never saw them.”
It was easy for warning signs to fly under the radar. In Marcella’s
family, dysfunction was the norm.
“It was a lot of domestic violence. And I think for Native
Americans it’s really common to see that kind of a dysfunctional
family. Not only that, but noticing the alcohol that’s also involved.

Trying to Heal the Littlest Minds

207

To us, it was normal. I mean, when we were growing up. And then
it’s kind of like it’s passed on from generation to generation.”
Marcella didn’t even think of it as a suicide attempt when as an
adolescent she leaped from a moving car, or when, later, she overdosed on pills. “It didn’t seem to me like it was that bad, in a way.”
And teenage Marcella “acted out.” “I would get in trouble a lot with
the police, and [had] a juvenile record. . . . I would always be going
to court for dealing or looting or vandalism or something that, just,
I can’t imagine my kids doing right now.”
Breanna’s birth when Marcella was fifteen years old saved her,
she said. “That’s when reality and responsibility kicked in.”
A mother of two before she turned twenty, Marcella worked
full-time to cover a $300-a-month apartment. She can’t imagine her
own teenage daughters doing the same. “My little one, she’s sixteen
right now and I can’t even fathom seeing her raising a little child at
her age.”
Marcella’s partner abused her for years—“not just emotional:
physical, mental, everything. . . . It got pretty severe.” He never hit
his children but they saw everything. Breanna, who’d always been
close to her dad, felt especially conflicted. Finally, “I said, ‘No. I can’t
do this anymore.’” But when he walked out he took most of their
income with him. “He was the primary breadwinner. So there’s the
mortgage, there’s the car payments, everything. We ended up losing
everything. . . . I ended up having to get two full-time jobs, and that’s
when I gave [Breanna] the primary responsibility of taking care of
her sisters, because I would go to work at six in the morning, get off
at three thirty and go to my next job at three forty-five and get off at
twelve midnight. So I never really saw my kids.”
When they moved three, four times in their Utah reservation
within a couple of years, Breanna was there beside her mother at two
in the morning, moving their furniture while her little sisters slept.
“It was a huge burden on her growing up, because I depended on her.
It was like, ‘OK, Breanna, did you cook for your sisters? Breanna, did
you pick up your sisters? Breanna, did you . . . ?’ It was constant. At

208

Anna Mehler Paperny

some point she probably felt like she didn’t have her own life. . . . I
might have given her a bit too much responsibility for her age.”
Through high school Breanna “was such a good kid”—good
grades, no drugs, no booze. Long-term boyfriend. She relished the
discipline of Junior Reserve Officers’ Training Corps, a pre-military
program for youth. “She had a path . . . she knew exactly where she
wanted to go. She wanted to go to the art institute. She was going to
travel the world.”
It’s easy, now, for her mom to see that driving perfectionism as
something more ominous. “She wouldn’t give herself any little bit of
room to make mistakes. . . . She always had to be perfect. . . . She had
so much that she wanted to do. And she piled all of that on herself.”
And then there was the anger—roiling, violent outbursts out
of nowhere. She’d run at her sisters with a knife at the least provocation. “I would question her, like, ‘Are you OK? Are you depressed?’.
. . She would brush it off.” The outbursts intensified in the last
months and weeks of her life. A group of girls beat her up to the
point her mom transferred her to another school. She had a wrenching argument with one of her best friends.
The summer morning of her death featured an escalating fight
over the most seemingly minor things: Marcella, hungover from
the night before, was slower to get up to register Breanna for school
that fall. Breanna was anxious and angry at the prospect of spending
her own hard-earned money for new tires on her car. “I think she just
made herself even more upset just thinking about all of that. So we
had an argument and she ended up slamming the door in my face”
so hard that picture frames toppled off the wall.
Breanna’s final text was to her boyfriend at around 11:50 a.m. “I’m
doing it now.”
He didn’t freak out: She’d said that before. Marcella says he told
her later: “‘I didn’t take her seriously because she didn’t do it the last
couple of times.’ I never knew.”
In the immediate aftermath of Breanna’s suicide, “I don’t remember even being. I don’t even remember what time or the hours or the

Trying to Heal the Littlest Minds

209

days were. . . . I noticed that time would pass because the flowers were
beginning to die.”
For the first time she found herself seeking psychological help
for herself and her family. She barely knew where to start. Her
younger girls went to a child-centered counseling group but found
it alienating to be around kids talking about uncles’ or grandparents’
accidental or natural deaths when their hurt felt so much worse.
“We didn’t know how to cope. We didn’t know how to get back
to normal. . . . It’s a pain that is so indescribable. It’s like your body
is trying to find a way to fix it and fix it and there’s no way that it’s
ever going to be fixed.”
For a year Marcella was in the depths of depression. “I kind of
had no motivation to work anymore. I couldn’t.” She used her employer’s family medical leave “because I felt I was not worthy to even
work. I felt that I was not worthy of anything.”
Counseling for herself and her girls is more obtainable now than
it was several years ago, she says. “Back then it was really hard to get
it on your insurance. You had to go through several evaluations and
you also had to get a referral in order for you to see a psychiatrist or
any kind of mental health [practitioner]. . . . We had to go through
hoops and ladders in order for us to get to see anyone.”
Kickboxing helped, from an anger-expunging perspective. So
did the reminder she still had two living girls to care for. Fear her
daughters will emulate their older sister keeps Marcella on alert,
changed her parenting. Puts work second, now, always. “After the
suicide I began to start coddling my children—my kids that are
alive now. . . . It feels almost like you’re walking on eggshells. Like,
‘OK, I don’t want to make this mistake again. What am I going to
do different so I don’t make this mistake again?’ And it’s awful,
because it’s a guilty feeling.”
“It’s easy to say” that it’s not her fault, Marcella tells me, a uselessly empathic reporter. “I think that’s what we all struggle with.”
Her daughter’s death granted her involuntary entry to a world of
suicide she hadn’t known existed. “I wasn’t introduced to suicide

210

Anna Mehler Paperny

when I was younger. . . . I had two family members, before my daughter passed away, that had committed suicide. And nobody in my
family ever shared that with me. It was like a hidden secret.” An
aunt overdosed on pills. A cousin drowned himself and his mom
couldn’t countenance it. Even after her other son was found hanging, strangled, years later, she still would not acknowledge what
had killed them.
“She won’t talk about it. . . . I can’t ask her, ‘How did it feel?’ She
lost her kids—both her kids—to the same thing. . . . And she won’t
talk about it. She won’t acknowledge it at all.”
Now Marcella derives purpose from smashing that walled unwillingness to confront suicide.
“My role now is I need to make sure that people are aware of
this and people understand what this can do to a family if it’s not
talked about.”
Now she has friends come to her for advice. She’s often the only
person they’ll tell. “One of them had a son that was beginning to cut
himself and he started to leave notes for his dad saying he’s going to
do this. And he approached me, he asked me, ‘What should I do?
What should I listen to?’
“It is really huge on the reservation. Nobody wants to talk about
it. Nobody wants to say, ‘Oh yeah, they took their own life.’ And
nobody sees that there’s a need to heal that pain. They just bear it
and the pain is passed on and they just bear it and bear it and bear
it and basically it ends up eating them up. . . . I was guilty of that, too.
Because the first two years [after] her passing away I didn’t acknowledge her suicide. I didn’t even tell people that she killed herself. I just
said it was an accident or I wouldn’t really go into it. It’s something
that needs to be talked about. Because if we don’t say anything,
nobody is going to say anything, and nobody’s going to understand
anything. And, to me, I felt I had a personal responsibility to make
sure that nobody else goes through this.”
∙∙∙

Trying to Heal the Littlest Minds

211

Again and again and again, I find, the people who feel most
keenly depression’s and suicide’s toll are those who’ve been there. It
hits home for Arielle Sheftall, who now researches child suicide: She
was fourteen years old when her mom died and her world just about
fell apart. “It was a very, very tough time. And thoughts of suicide,
absolutely. I would have thoughts of suicide.” But she was lucky, she
says: She told an older cousin who got her the help she needed.
The knowledge that not everyone has that luck helps drive her.
“I’ve kind of lived that experience and I just want to, from my
own experience, help others and say, ‘There is a light at the end of
the tunnel. And there is a lot that’s unknown, but there are things
we do know that do work. And if that doesn’t work, maybe we try
this. . . . So, I think,” she says to me, “that’s why suicide really is one
of the topics that I’m very passionate about.
“It’s something that hits home, but it’s preventable.”

22
“More Children Do Not Have to Die”
Human beings have a finite capacity for outrage and at some point
Canadians ran out of outrage at twelve-year-olds across the country
killing themselves for lack of care. It was the litany, I think—one
child suicide after another, sometimes in suicide pacts, in Indigenous
communities few could find on a map, in situations that boggle belief
and numb the mind. States of emergency became constants but the
urgency never seemed to last long enough to produce lasting change;
inaction left crises unaddressed and robbed those crises of their
power. And it was the degree of systemic deprivation behind the
awfulness—not just lack of mental health care but also lack of housing and clean water and opportunities for hope, and the legacy of
residential schools and centuries of concerted genocidal attempts
to stamp out entire peoples and their cultures.

Joly n n
Kerri Cutfeet met his daughter for the first time when she was twelve
years old in the cafeteria of Thunder Bay hospital’s pediatric psych
ward. Jolynn Winter had been there two weeks after running away
from her foster home—the latest of many foster homes in small
communities all over Northern Ontario. Just weeks earlier, in the

“More Children Do Not Have to Die”

213

wake of a close friend’s suicide, she’d tried to hang herself with a
T-shirt from a bathroom stall coat hook. While she was held as an
inpatient—“they just locked her up in there”—in a city where she
knew no one, her case worker at Tikinagan Child and Family
Services was calling around, trying to find her somewhere to live.1
Kerri was living with his partner and two young kids on the
Wapekeka First Nation reserve in Northern Ontario, a fly-in community hundreds of miles from the nearest midsize city. He’d discovered Jolynn was his daughter just four years earlier, he told me,
but had kept his distance: She was enmeshed in the foster system
and he wasn’t sure she’d appreciate this stranger inserting himself
into her life. Now, though, was different. Now the eldest child he’d
never met needed a home.
“My partner, she said, ‘Kerri, you should do something,
already.’ . . . Hearing that, from her, that was awesome.”
It took all of a week to sort everything out. He met with Jolynn’s
caseworker to hammer out a plan for when she was released—the
structure she would need, what he would provide, the options she
would have if she needed additional care.
And then Kerri was in the Thunder Bay Regional Health Center
psych-ward cafeteria. Terrified.
“I was so nervous and so scared but so excited. I was afraid she
was pissed off at me—disappointed in me, you know? For not being
there all her life. She didn’t even really look at me right away. And
she kind of gave me this nervous smile and I got up and hugged her
and I texted my partner right away, as soon as I seen her, just saying,
‘Oh, she’s beautiful.’”
They went from the hospital to the mall, where Kerri bought Jolynn
a winter jacket and a rose-gold-colored heart-shaped necklace, then
flew home, where they had a room of her own all ready for her.
His younger children, nine and ten, were ecstatic at the prospect
of a brand-new older sister. “What I felt so bad about was that one
question: ‘Where was she all our lives?’ . . . They were just so happy
to have her.”

214

Anna Mehler Paperny

He remembers, right away, trying to talk to Jolynn—about herself, and what she’d been through; about her mom, and why she’d
ultimately had to give Jolynn up to family services; about why he
hadn’t gotten in touch earlier. “Anything to make her feel better.”
And she was happy, he said.
It wasn’t until afterward that he learned she’d stopped calling her
doctor and her caseworker after she moved in.
Kerri’s voice glows when he talks about the way Jolynn became
comfortable with him, made demands of him a daughter would of
her dad. “She’d text us and say something along the lines of, ‘One
of you come and get me while one of you starts cooking! I’m
hungry!’” The thing she requested most was cupcakes. “And then,
as she got more comfortable with me, she’d say, ‘Get me cupcakes!’
That felt good, you know? She didn’t ask, she demanded.”
Christmas was a joy. A house full of children and Xboxes and
children squabbling good-naturedly over Xboxes. By winter break
Jolynn had already made friends and Kerri figured it was cool for her
to stay out a bit later—there was no school to worry about waking
up for. And he knew readjusting after the holidays to the schedule
they’d agreed to follow would be a challenge. He tried to nudge
Jolynn gently toward self-discipline. “My very last message to her on
Facebook . . . I told her, ‘It’s about time that you start coming in earlier, sleeping earlier, because you’ve got to go to school. We both
signed a paper saying we would follow that safety plan.’ That was part
of it, going to school.”
There was another death, right when school was starting up again:
Jolynn’s cousin in Lac Seul, several hundred miles away, was found
frozen to death outside one morning. Jolynn wouldn’t talk about it,
Kerri said.
“She must have taken it pretty hard. She said she was sad about
it but I didn’t see her expressing it, you know?”
His daughter didn’t express sadness much at all, for that matter.
The only time he’d seen her cry was at a silly video her friend posted
on Facebook. She laughed and laughed but suddenly was sobbing.

“More Children Do Not Have to Die”

215

“And I asked her, ‘What are you laughing about?’ And she said, ‘I’m
not laughing, I’m crying.’”
But she seemed happy, he said. He did everything he could so
she’d be happy.
They’d developed a morning routine: He’d get up and sit on the
couch and watch her bedroom door, which opened out to the living
room.
“She’d poke her head out, look around and then scurry to the
washroom. And every morning I’d wait for that to happen.”
“I didn’t want to go bug her—she was a young lady and I didn’t
want to invade her space too much. But I’d make sure I heard something, at least. Like, if I didn’t hear anything from the room for a
while I’d go knock or something and say, ‘Hey, what’s up?’”
That Sunday, Kerri decided to sleep in. Didn’t rush to the couch
to check for that head poking out, for the scurrying out to the washroom. It wasn’t until close to two o’clock that his partner’s shriek
yanked him awake.
He raced through the living room to Jolynn’s bedroom door
and saw his partner on the floor, Jolynn in her arms. A string—a
shoelace, he thinks, or the pullstring of a hoodie—tight around
her neck. She’d hanged herself, sitting, from the doorknob. Her
body’s weight had pulled the door ajar, which is when Kerri’s partner saw her. And screamed.
“I could still feel some life in her, but just barely. She was all pale,
there was no color to her skin, and she was all blue and purple around
the mouth and lips.”
He cut the string off, started CPR, did whatever he could think
of to try and breathe life back into his bluing daughter.
And, hysterical, called the clinic—a nursing station that would
send paramedics round in an emergency. The agonizing slowness
of their response hasn’t lessened in his mind. It took an eternity
for a driver to come, an eternity for him to come in, to try to resuscitate his little girl. He covered his two younger children’s eyes
to try to spare them the image of their sister’s strangulation, the

216

Anna Mehler Paperny

way the sight of an uncle’s suicide had burned itself into his eightyear-old brain decades earlier. “I just didn’t want my kids to have
that image.”
They finally put Jolynn in the back of the truck and brought her
to the clinic, to try to save her there. For hours they tried, before pronouncing her dead.
Later he learned she was bullied online—messages telling her,
“Kill yourself.” And that she was part of a suicide pact with a number
of other young girls from the community—a pact community leaders had gone to the federal government to try to stop. Months later,
her brother, ten years old, was a target: “This person made a video
about my son, poking fun at him, telling him to kill himself, too. . . .
It might even be the same person. I don’t even know.”
There’s no good way to ask a dad what could have kept his little
girl alive. Would it have helped her to have supports in the community—a therapist, a doctor?
“I’m not sure about that. There were people to talk to.”

Two days after twelve-year-old Jolynn Winter hanged herself
from her bedroom doorknob on a Sunday in January 2017, her friend
Chantell Fox, also twelve, took her own life. Both were members
of the four-hundred-person Wapekeka First Nation. All suicides
are preventable tragedies but theirs feel particularly so because they
were predicted. Jolynn and Chantell were both part of the suicide
pact community leaders had discovered six months earlier, prompting a plea for funds—$376,706 for salaries, benefits, training, and
rent for a four-person suicide prevention team. “There have been
many suicide attempts by youth in the past year and it is believed
that there is a suicide pact with a group of young females,” reads the
request, submitted to the Canadian federal government, which is
responsible for health care on reserves, in July 2016.2
The proposal met with radio silence save for rote acknowledgment from Health Canada.

“More Children Do Not Have to Die”

217

Days after Jolynn’s and Chantell’s suicides, Nishnawbe Aski
Nation grand chief Alvin Fiddler called out Canada’s prime minister
Justin Trudeau for his inaction in a letter all the more damning for
its lack of bombast.
I write not to embarrass you, not simply to make a political point, but
to plead for the sake of our youth and, as a matter of life and death,
that you immediately act on these solutions. . . .
Canada has run out of excuses for these tragedies.3

Trudeau met with Grand Chief Fiddler and other Indigenous
leaders; was reportedly “receptive” to their ideas but short on
promises. 4
And then in June, twelve-year-old Jenera Roundsky killed herself shortly after returning home to Wapekeka after spending
months in a residential treatment facility hundreds of miles away.
The community had opposed her discharge, said Wapekeka council member Joshua Frogg, who was Chantell’s uncle and who, in the
wake of the preteen suicides, became something of a community
spokesperson.5
These girls were Michael Kirlew’s patients.
In an affidavit before Canada’s Human Rights Tribunal that year,
the family doctor laid responsibility for the children’s suicides on
government failure to provide basic health care—preventive or
urgent—to these kids and their communities.
“In my daily medical practice, I can draw a direct correlation
between the lack of access to early medical interventions leading to
compounded mental health problems and youth suicide. . . . This
recent suicide crisis in Wapekeka is not the first suicide crisis that
has occurred and I fear that it will not be the last suicide crisis if the
status quo remains. Wapekeka has routinely identified what they
need to address the high rate of youth suicide. These tragedies are
preventable and more children do not need to die.” 6
This is one small remote community.

218

Anna Mehler Paperny

Similar scenes play out in Indigenous homes across the continent.
Stateside, Native American children aged ten to seventeen are
killing themselves at a rate 62 percent higher than white people of
the same age. The disparity is worse for adolescent girls, who are killing themselves at almost three times the rate of their white counterparts and whose suicide rate increased almost 90 percent between
1999 and 2015. The suicide rate for eighteen- to twenty-four-year-old
girls more than doubled in that time and has been, consistently, more
than double the average. (Among young Indigenous boys the suicide
rate, while still higher than average, has dropped or stayed steady.)7
And these are probably significant underestimations, because deaths
of Indigenous Americans tend to go underreported.8
It’s easy to lose hope, to feel the systemic injustices plaguing
North America’s Indigenous communities are too deep-rooted to
tackle. But the people making the most difference in that epidemic
of despair are Indigenous communities themselves, picking up the
slack left by government bodies that are actually responsible for providing services. Or look at the We Matter campaign—because that
needs saying!—a Canadian initiative started by Indigenous youth
meant to instill a sense of hope where it’s lacking.9 Countless organizations and initiatives seek to fill in the fatal cracks too many
people fall through.

Gor don Poschwatta got a suicide call while we were talking
on the phone.
Luckily he was already in his car on his way to Burns Lake, partway through that day’s one-hundred-odd-mile odyssey from one
remote British Columbia community to another. Unseasonably
muddy November roads made a long journey longer. “I’m gonna
blame today on global warming,” he says from the side of the road,
where he’s pulled over to chat in a pocket of forest with decent mobile
reception. I can hear the quiet clicking of his hazard lights in the
background between sentences.10

“More Children Do Not Have to Die”

219

I’d phoned him because he heads clinical practice at Carrier
Sekani Family Services, an organization dedicated to bringing badly
needed mental health care to Indigenous communities in northern
BC that would otherwise have none. Their aim is prevention and
ongoing treatment, but suicide attempts and suicidal ideation are
their bread and butter. A couple of weeks before we spoke, he told
me, he got four calls in one day from four different communities. In
one case, they arrived too late. The year before they got a call from
the RCMP about fourteen kids (“well, kids under thirty”) who’d
tried to kill themselves in one area in a single weekend.
“We were running around at night trying to find them and trying
to stabilize. . . . Some people, their relatives had taken them to hospitals in a nearby town; some people were there; some people were
hiding; some people were drinking in the bush. Everything. We had
a team. We brought in, I think, six people that night. We went door
to door and one at a time knocked them off the list.”
Stabilizing these crises is about as bare-bones a triage as you can
imagine. If the person is relatively low-risk (thinking about suicide
but not concretely or imminently planning it), Poschwatta’s team
will make sure they have ongoing supports and leave them at home.
“If it turns into moderate risk, where there’s a fairly detailed plan,
and they haven’t done anything and they don’t really want to, but it’s
there, then we need 24/7 mature, sober people . . . doing shift work
until we get enough mental health work in to reduce that risk down
to minimal.”
If there’s no one sufficiently reliable on hand, “we get creative. . . .
You know, ‘Where’s your cousins? Where’s your uncles? Where’s your
grandma?’ Well, in the next village there’s an uncle and he’s been
sober for twenty-two years and we phone over and he’s there and he’s
willing to take him in for a few days.
“This is not easy work.”
Assessing the degree of danger a person poses to themselves in
that moment is brutally tricky at the best of times, and Poschwatta’s
team has no specialized training in how to do it. That weighs heavily

220

Anna Mehler Paperny

on him. “I don’t know how many suicides I’ve assessed—well over
a hundred, anyway. I would like to have that backup, have a hotline
where there’s experts available to review what I’ve heard.” More
often than not, it’s just him and his colleagues making that judgment call—will this kid be safe here, on their own, with these people
who love them but who may be struggling with problems of their
own, who may not be able to babysit a young adult indefinitely? Will
they survive the night? “If we don’t have anyone there, then it’s just
take ’em to the hospital. By hook or by crook, get ’em to the hospital.” He pauses. “But we find that’s a problem.”
You’d think taking someone in the grips of suicidality to the nearest hospital would at least get them through the crisis. Keep them
safe until someone capable can figure out a plan of care. Not so much.
“All they do is ask people, ‘Are you suicidal?’ And if they say, ‘No,’
and there’s no sign—like, they don’t have rope burns around their
neck or something—they let them go.”
That can be a deadly mistake.
“We’ve had situations that went sideways. We worked our butts
off and we thought they were in there and we thought we had a doctor
onside, they were going to hold them for an assessment or whatever,
and an hour later we get a phone call: THey’re back on the street. They
lied to the doctor. They said, ‘I’m OK, I don’t need any help.’ So we
have to run around on the street and phone the cops again,” Poschwatta
says, aggravation in his voice. “We had seven in one year that suicided
within one day of being in emergency. . . . If it was non-Aboriginal
people I’m pretty sure there would be a stink to high heaven. There
would be inquiries and god knows what.”
And in the Lower Mainland, after Brian David Geisheimer and
Sarah Louise Charles and Sebastien Pavit Abdi walked out of the
psych ward and obliterated themselves, there was. That doesn’t happen
in the small, largely Indigenous communities in the same province
six hundred miles away. The inquest-spurring outcry isn’t there.
In Hazelton, a 270-person community in northwest BC, the staff
at Carrier Sekani took matters into their own hands: THey set up

“More Children Do Not Have to Die”

221

their own suicide crisis unit next door to the hospital and got clinicians with existing gigs elsewhere to commit time to staff it. Postdischarge suicides dropped almost immediately.
Once they’ve managed to get people stable, Poschwatta and his
team sit them down in a group, make safety plans, and start honing
in on what’s driving them to want to die. Some people need to talk
one-on-one with a health worker; some feel better going over their
triggers of despair with others who are experiencing the same kind
of thing.
There’s a lot of trauma: people who’ve been abused by parents,
uncles, elders who were abused themselves. A lot of self-medication
with alcohol. “It might be after two or three days working with them
we decide this one needs to go to provincial alcohol and drug treatment, or this one needs a psych assessment. So we just keep working
and listening until we come up with a plan for each person.”
None of this is fun. “It’s grueling,” he says. “I’m not happy about
it. I wish it would go away. . . . It’s not a job. It’s like I’m here to do this
to help them, ’cause nobody else will.”
The proactive work’s a bit less soul-destroying. The staff at Carrier
Sekani have started focusing on depression screening for everyone.
Apparently, the secret is not to mention the D-word while doing it.
“We have some very nice people explain to the people that this is a
little checkup that will let you know how you’re doing in terms of
mental health.”
Also, bribery. People who get the checkup get free lanyards with
their clan symbol on them and are entered in a draw for an iPad.
Then cultural liaisons go in and nudge the people who’ve been
flagged toward treatment. “We’re very gentle, like right off the bat
it’d be, ‘There are some things we’d like to talk to you about, would
you be available to go for a cup of coffee or something like that?’ And
we try to steer them to services.”
Ideally you’d get care where you live, or close to it. But it’s tough
convincing clinicians to move to communities of a few dozen or a
couple of hundred people in the middle of temperate rainforest

222

Anna Mehler Paperny

wilderness. Tougher still to get outside clinicians who can actually
earn the trust of the people they’re caring for.
“And then,” Henry Harder tells me when I phone him in Prince
George, a 75,000-person city in northern British Columbia, “there’s
the whole issue of stigma: If you’re a community of a couple hundred
people, the mental health therapist arrives in town and now you’re
lining up, everyone knows you’re going. So . . . you tend to not go.” 11
I had called him to try and get my head around the gap in mental
health care for Indigenous people. He figures he’s one of ten psychologists in Prince George, which is also a service hub for dozens
of remote communities.
He knows you won’t get the best mental health care in every tiny
community—but telepsychiatry is known to work, he says, if not as
well as in-person visits at least much better than nothing, or the fumbling best efforts of someone who isn’t well-versed in psychic pain. But
telepsychiatry is grossly underutilized: Only 1 percent of Ontarians
who need psychiatric care get it through telepsychiatry, even in remote
communities where that otherwise means going without any care at
all for a year or more12—and in the US, while telepsychiatry has existed
in some form for more than half a century,13 it remains “a niche technology in many health systems.”14 At least it can get you a diagnosis,
an assessment outside of the nearest (distant) emergency department’s
frantic scrum. A prescription, maybe. Or an informed opinion, with
perhaps a referral to an urban center if you need specific services, one
that will ensure you get those services once you arrive.
“We’ve got to do a good job of getting them assessed and getting
them out and, for god’s sake, helping them get back to their community. They’re just dumped out the front door of their hospital.”
Seriously.
He knows people who’ve been left penniless outside the Prince
George hospital to fend for themselves in a city that isn’t theirs because
neither level of government will take responsibility for transporting
them back to their home. The federal government is responsible for
health care on-reserve and the provincial government is responsible

“More Children Do Not Have to Die”

223

for health care off-reserve and their tussles over whose job it is to transfer someone who traveled to the city to get care back to the reserve
often leaves the person—often a kid—stranded.
“People fall through the cracks pretty easily,” said Cindy Hardy,
who is also a psychologist in Prince George and who I reached out to
because of her work on the ways people fall through those cracks.15
Health systems fail people in the most basic ways but also in the less
obvious ones. Let’s say you make an appointment to see a psychiatrist
or psychologist in a big city a few hundred miles away. Jackpot—congratulations. Now you need to negotiate the time off work, arrange
the child care, maybe figure out where you’re going to spend the night
if you can’t make the six-hour drive there and back in one day. Maybe
you have a car and can afford gas; maybe you get a voucher for the
bus. Or maybe you can’t swing the bus schedule so you’re left hitching a ride on a highway that’s become synonymous with missing and
murdered Indigenous women. Good luck making that appointment.
“If they don’t show up for appointments or they don’t call, they’re off
the list—that’s it. So when you’re feeling really depressed and you
can’t get out of bed, that’s easy to do. They just fall off the radar.”
Indigenous people are supposed to have extended health coverage. But, guess what: You need to make a special application for
psychotherapy.
“Isn’t that ridiculous?” she exclaims. “People are looking for help
and they have to go through all these hoops. And I see this repeatedly with insurers. . . . The paperwork is more of a barrier if your
literacy is low, or if you don’t have access to a supportive physician.”
Annoying paperwork can be a barrier for therapists as much as
patients: Busy professionals would rather not spend time filling out
forms. “Especially when we have a load of other people who don’t
require that much paperwork, yeah, we’re going to go with the path
of least resistance, right?”
(In case you were wondering, I did email the federal government’s
health department: How many requests for mental health care are
made each year, and how many are granted, under Canada’s health

224

Anna Mehler Paperny

benefits program covering Indigenous people? But they refused
to say.)
Media frenzies around clusters of Indigenous youth suicides—
like the one when Jolynn and Chantell and Jenera killed themselves,
like when a slew of young people in Attawapiskat First Nation killed
themselves the year before—drive her Prince George colleague
Henry Harder nuts.
“Indigenous suicide becomes some sort of a banner call for
people, and words like ‘epidemic’ and ‘crisis’ get used.” The feast-andfamine way news organizations cover Indigenous suicide makes it
easier for politicians and policy-makers to cast around for “a quick,
hopefully easy and hopefully cheap solution to the problem.”
“When the government freaks out and they send a whole bunch
of clinicians into one area, that helps for a little while. But everybody
piles back out again and everything goes back to where it was before,”
he says. “To me, the solution here is to provide adequate services and
health care and food and opportunities into those communities long
before they have a suicide issue. . . . If I could have a big banner it
would say, ‘Give that money beforehand.’” But all too often projects
meant to bridge chasms end mid-air. “We seem to always go partway
down a path and then the funding stops. The initiative stops. And it
never fully develops.” And even when there is funding for health
interventions, the execution falls flat. You’ll have half a dozen different pilot projects under different government umbrellas doing different things in a single place. “You could have one community
approached by three or four different groups all coming to say,
‘Well, we’re here to help you with your suicide prevention.’” It
doesn’t really foster trust when you feel more like an anthropological experiment than a group of humans meriting the same care as
your fellow citizens.
“This sounds like a bit of a broken record, but one of the things
Canadian society struggles with over and over again is the whole
issue of the residential school legacy. And a great deal of the mental
illness issues, especially on reserve, lead directly back to that legacy.

“More Children Do Not Have to Die”

225

And until we just stop pretending that never happened, or pretend
like throwing money at it or making an apology in Ottawa is going
to change that, then we’re going to continue having these issues. We
have to help communities deal with that. There are people who were
sexually abused in their residential schools who are sexual abusers
on reserve. And they are in leadership positions and kids tell me they
can’t go for help to the elders because they’re abusing them.
“How do you break that cycle?”
“I make presentations all over the world,” he says wearily, “and
I get a better reception outside of Canada than I do in Canada. In
Canada you get kind of some version of, ‘Get over it.’ I’m serious.
It’s like, ‘That was a long time ago. Canada has apologized. We’ve
given those Indians a hell of a lot of money. Why don’t they just get
over it?’”

Michael Kir lew—Jolynn, Chantell, and Jenera’s doctor—uses
the phrase “transformation” a lot when he talks about what needs to
happen to make Indigenous health care anything other than a cruel
joke “structured to deny care.” He believes the setup, the people running it, the care that’s provided and the way decisions are made, all
need to be wholly transformed.16 “Child mental health has to go from
being considered a program to a right.”
He sees young kids with developmental disabilities that never get
treated because the federal government won’t cover the cost of travel
to a city with specialists capable of assessing their needs. He’s had
travel requests to see a doctor denied because a patient saw the doctor
eight months earlier. So kids grow up lacking necessary care, struggling to cope at home and in school, where as students they receive
less funding, per capita, than their non-Indigenous counterparts.17
If, like a huge proportion of Indigenous kids, they’re in foster care,
they can have been through dozens of homes by the time they hit
puberty, which means that what care they get is truncated. “It
becomes a recipe for disaster.”

226

Anna Mehler Paperny

Worse than all this, though, is the way a system that under­values
you in the most literal way reinforces the suicidal sense that you
don’t matter.
“Colonization really works to take away your hope—hope in justice, hope in fairness, hope in health equity. . . . Youth might lose
hope because of all the different things that have happened in their
lives, because of all this trauma, but, as well, because they interface
with a system that has told them that they are hopeless and they have
no value.”
What do you tell a suicidal twelve-year-old?
“I tell every single one of those youths that their life is valuable—
that [their] life has purpose. . . . They may have never heard that
before.”

23
Race as Barrier
Mental illness is expert at compounding existing marginalizations
—taking aspects of your life that make you vulnerable and using
them to screw you further.
So it is with race. Not being white can make you not only less
likely to get in the door to get care but less likely to get good care
and less likely to stick around long enough for that care to work.
Things that might otherwise be protective—a close-knit community, family ties, a commitment to stoic strength—can work against
you. Even the most basic need to be seen by the people providing
your care can prove elusive, shafting your shot at help that makes a
positive difference.
Let’s be clear: I am not a person of color and I don’t live with
the burdens, don’t face the barriers that entails. I’ve tried to read
as much and talk to as many people as I could to rectify my own
innate ignorance, because frankly this barrier to adequate, effective mental health care—ranging from systemic racism to therapeutic incongruence—is too urgent, too deadly not to address
head-on.
A 2010 National Institute of Mental Health study found that
while only one-fifth of Americans with depression got the right
kind of care for their condition, African Americans, Caribbean
black and Mexican Americans were half as likely to get good care.

228

Anna Mehler Paperny

And while health insurance may enable better access to depression
care, it does not ensure better care.1 Latinx Americans in need of
mental health care are less likely to get it, less likely to see a specialist, more likely to experience delays and, when they do get care, less
likely to get anything congruent with guidelines and less likely to
be satisfied with the care they get.2
An American study of Medicaid enrollees found the most marginalized or seriously ill people were least likely to get minimally
adequate care. Black people and those who began depression treatment with an inpatient psychiatric stay for depression were less likely
to receive minimally adequate psychotherapy and more likely to
receive inadequate treatment.3
When it comes to accessing health care, poverty and geography can screw you in terms of getting in the door; race can keep
screwing you once you’re there. There are insidious hurdles—a
health practitioner treats you a certain way, makes assumptions
about you and what you need, fails to see you for you because of
the way you look. You’re made to feel unwelcome, uncared for.
A nurse almost gave eighteen-year-old Rudayna Bahubeshi someone else’s medication when she confused her with the only other
black woman in the mood disorder inpatient unit. She had been
enveloped in a depressive vortex that yanked her out of her life, out
of her final weeks of high school and into a psych hospital. What may
seem like a minor, malice-less slip on the nurse’s part made her feel
shut out of an ostensibly universal health care system. “After several
weeks of feeling increasingly hopeless in the hospital, I checked
myself out. For many years, I didn’t seek mental health support,” she
wrote in a 2017 opinion piece for the CBC. “I can’t say those who
were negligent in overseeing my care had malicious intentions or
made conscious assumptions related to my identity. But at the end
of the day, do intentions matter when the ways in which I was vulnerable were overlooked and unacknowledged?” 4
Interventions won’t work if you can’t connect. Clinicians are
trying to fix your brain, not your bike.

Race as Barrier

229

An effective therapist doesn’t need to be their patient’s demographic twin. They just need to be cognizant of what people different
from them are going through.
The newbie psychologists Rheeda Walker advises look at her
askance when she tells them to ask new patients about the role race
and culture play in their lives. In their first session, even. In a written questionnaire, if they’d rather. It’s key to understanding where
a person is coming from, she tells me. And it’s often something
people won’t bring up on their own, “because you don’t want to
make other people feel uncomfortable.” 5 I’d called her up—a psychologist and head (and founder) of the University of Houston’s
Culture, Risk, and Resilience Lab—to help shed some light on psychological racial disparities. She speaks with the patient authority
of an expert who breaks down her expertise to the clueless for a
living. (Our phone conversation took place on November 9, 2016,
the day after the US election, a day when much of the world was
reeling and, she noted, a day when cultural sensitivity would be a
must if you’re a health practitioner.)
It’s often tempting to hope that not mentioning race neutralizes
it as an issue. But if race or cultural background is a key part of your
identity, if it affects the way you experience the world and your own
psychological pain, ignoring it can doom a therapeutic relationship.
“So you can see how termination might happen prematurely. It’s like,
‘I don’t even know why I’m talking to them. I should just go somewhere else.’ Or they don’t go anywhere.”
Walker, who is black, sees two barriers to access for African
Americans: getting in the door, and sticking with treatment long
enough to get well. The former is often influenced by a combination
of socioeconomic factors—we know poverty and isolation discriminate along stark racial lines—and the assumption you don’t need
or deserve help.
The tendency of black Americans and other minorities to quit
care is complex but it’s attributable in part to a sense of un-belonging,
Walker says. And it’s on the clinician to address it. “There’s this idea

230

Anna Mehler Paperny

that, ‘Oh, no one’s even presenting themselves for care.’ And I think,
no, the burden is on the therapist that when someone does show up,
you make an extra effort to keep that person in care. Even if you’re
uncomfortable.”
Gursharan Virdee, who is a Toronto-based psychologist and
researcher, tells me she sees it in the patients she works with—young
South Asian Canadian women who come to her multilingual practice
after seeking mental health help from more mainstream providers
and not feeling seen.
“I’ve worked with a young woman who wears a hijab, was never
asked by her therapist about her religion and so on, and the not asking
actually led this young woman to disengage because she didn’t feel
empowered to share or kind of talk from that position,” she says to
me by phone.6 Another young woman felt her former therapist didn’t
get her family dynamic, where she was undervalued relative to the
men in her family and how that factored into pathological feelings of
worthlessness. “There’s a lack of awareness of the role of culture in
one’s experience and how that might shape a person’s mental health.”
Napoleon Harrington, a Michigan-based counselor who focuses
much of his work and advocacy on communities of color, sees three
factors preventing black Americans from accessing mental health
care when they need it. One is a cultural mythology of strength.
“We’ve been identified as a strong people, and when strength is
mischaracterized it gets identified as not needing support or not
needing help or not being willing to depend on resources that may
in one regard oppress you and maybe in another way render you
weak. So I think because strength has been mischaracterized in our
culture it gives the impression that we can’t find those resources.” 7
The second is religion—a powerful protective factor when it
comes to thinking of killing yourself, but also a potential deterrent
from seeking secular care. “Reliance on God is extremely heavy, and
reliance on God to cure you, to deliver you, to heal you and all of
those conversations that come from each of those convictions . . .
[means] I don’t have faith if I get help.”

Race as Barrier

231

The third: Would you trust your thoughts and feelings to a doctor,
a counselor, embedded within a system with a long history of treating you and people who look like you like lesser persons? “Black folks
and brown folks have a challenge with a system that has not always
been in their best interest . . . it makes us very, very mistrusting of anybody who works within that system.” And if people of color are more
likely to be incarcerated and more likely to have their kids taken from
them by child welfare agencies, maybe you’re less likely to confide in
a clinician with the power to set either of those things in motion.
Of those three factors, Harrington is best positioned to tackle
the first—to convince people of color, especially in the black community, that mental health is something that should be on their mind,
that mental health care is something they may need and that there’s
no shame in seeking it. He tries to meet people where they’re at; use
straightforward “stigma-free” language; use slang and Ebonics if it
seems helpful.
I ask him, a black counselor, if he has advice for a white clinician
working with people of color. What should they take into account,
without projecting?
“The intolerant history of America and its behavior toward black
and brown people has created a layer of anxiety, trauma, depression,
you name it . . . a layer that’s palpable enough for anyone who’s brown
in America to feel it. . . . So I think the major difference is, every time
you’re working with someone of a black or brown context, [remember that] that layer somehow is always present even if they’re wildly
successful, they have enough money or what have you, they will
always meet something or someone that reminds them that race is
still present.”

Jasmin
No one thought to ask Jasmin what was going on in her mind when she
tried to annihilate herself. When she swallowed a pack of high-strength

232

Anna Mehler Paperny

allergy medication and wound up delirious and hospitalized. Not
when her mom came to the emergency room to meet her and the
panicked friends who’d rushed her there. Not when she drank, at
nurses’ urging, an activated charcoal smoothie to keep toxins from
sinking into her system. Not when she was discharged back out into
the world.
“Why didn’t anyone think to say, ‘Are you depressed? What’s
going on?’ I just knew I wanted to die.” 8
Eighteen years old, getting over a bad breakup, preparing to
move out of her mom’s place and go to college, Jasmin felt her life
become inexplicably unbearable. “I just felt like the walls were closing in on me.”
That time—the first time—the decision to swallow the entire
off-brand allergy prescription she’d just filled was entirely impulsive.
“I wasn’t really thinking straight. . . . After I did it, I was like, ‘Why
did I do that?’ I didn’t understand.”
In the hospital, with her worried mom and friends, Jasmin felt
more embarrassed than anything. They asked, “‘Why would you
do something like that? Why would you want to take your own
life?’ I told them there was a lot going on.”
She was mad at herself. She felt stupid. Overemotional, over­
reacting. “After a while I just let it go.”
And that was that. Jasmin moved from Kentucky to Louisiana,
living with her dad in New Orleans while she went to college.
But it didn’t go well and she didn’t know why. She couldn’t concentrate, kept having to retake classes. Kept messing up orders at
the pizza place where she worked. She blamed her skittering brain
on distractedness. Admonished herself to do better.
But the walls kept closing in. The second time, at age twenty,
Jasmin meant it. “The second time I was like, ‘OK, I know for sure I
don’t want to be here anymore.’”
She swallowed a bottle of Tylenol. Her dad, home from work
early, found her and took her to the hospital. This time it took a tube
snaking down her throat to exhume the poison. Thirty minutes

Race as Barrier

233

watching gunk slurp through the clear plastic tube clawing against
her esophagus.
“That was a really horrible day. . . . I was mad that it didn’t work.”
This time, she was sent to a psychiatric facility. “It was a really
nice place, but of course I didn’t want to be there. I didn’t want
anybody to be all up in my business.” And it freaked her out to be
in close quarters for the first time with people with severe mental
illness, behaving erratically. She wasn’t one of them, she told herself. She wasn’t nuts. “It was scary. I saw things I’d never seen
before. . . . At the time I was like, ‘Why do you have me in here
with people like this?’ I was angry. I wanted to leave. . . . My family
came and saw me a few times. I felt so embarrassed: Here she is,
in a psychiatric hospital.”
She refused to talk to the psychiatrist at first, furious at her captivity. Changed tack the second day “because I was determined to
get out of there and I knew if I didn’t talk to anybody, I couldn’t.”
He diagnosed her with depression. The diagnosis was not
comforting.
“It actually felt worse. I just thought that people who had mental
illness were crazy. That’s what you saw on TV,” she said. “I’m like,
‘Well, I’m not crazy, so why are they telling me I’m depressed?’”
For six months Jasmin got what vanishingly few depressed people
get: evidence-based treatment. Antidepressants and psychotherapy
based on science. Unfortunately, six months is a nanosecond when
it comes to chronic mood disorders. The meds dampened her depression but didn’t alleviate it. When the side effects—irritability and
insomnia were the worst—threatened to eclipse the symptoms the
drugs tried to treat, she went off them entirely. “You get really frustrated after a while.” Her psychiatric visits lasted a few months more.
“He was a good doctor, but I still wasn’t really comfortable talking
about my feelings or emotions.” In a lot of ways, Jasmin knows, she
was still in denial. Refused to consider herself crazy. Didn’t tell anyone
for fear they’d respond the same way she had when confronted with
her fellow psych patients.

234

Anna Mehler Paperny

Community support systems can be a powerful protective factor
for anyone dealing with mental illness, but she discovered that deepseated communal misconceptions about sicknesses of the brain can
make them worse.
“I think that one of the reasons I was so in denial for so long and
I thought people with mental illness were crazy was because in the
black community, they make you think you’re just supposed to pray
away a mental illness. It’s like, ‘Oh, you’re depressed? Well you’re
not praying enough. You need to get closer to God.’ I think that’s
the worst thing to tell somebody: How do you know someone with
a mental illness hasn’t already been praying? How do you know
they’re not close to God? Telling somebody something like that, it
makes them feel worse.”
Jasmin’s still trying to figure out what it is that makes her community’s exhortations to stick-to-itiveness backfire when it comes
to psychological resilience, why it remains so tough to reconcile the
capacity to survive waves of collective and personal trauma with
the reality that overwhelming psychic pain comes in different,
uncontrollable forms.
“I think it goes back generations. A lot of black people feel like
we got through slavery, we got through all this, we’re supposed to be
strong all the time. But don’t you think they were depressed back
then? Just because you got through something doesn’t mean you
don’t still have emotions.”
Even Jasmin’s dad, who never judged, who wanted to help, who
wanted to convince his daughter her life was worth living, made
things tougher sometimes. “There were times when he was like, ‘You
need to be stronger than this.’ He never told me to snap out of it, but
he’s like, ‘You have a lot going for yourself.’ That’s not a really good
thing to tell someone who has a mental illness. But he didn’t understand that at the time.”
Then there was the worst year. Jasmin was out of school, out of
treatment, and shortly out of a job. That last, especially, was a body
blow. “I’d never been fired from a job in my life. The walls were

Race as Barrier

235

closing in on me again. This was years of everything finally building up.” She overdosed on every drug she could lay her hands on.
Prescription and off the pharmacy shelf and everything at the back
of the medicine cabinet. Benadryl, Tylenol, high-strength nasal
decongestant, “four different prescription medications all at once.”
The nurses saved her life and Jasmin was miserable about it. “I was
like, ‘I took all of this medication and I’m still alive?’ I felt like a failure.
‘I fail at life and I fail at trying to kill myself. This is just ridiculous.’”
Jasmin spent almost a week in intensive care before being transferred to a different psychiatric inpatient facility, this one a couple
of hours out of town.
When she assured them she had a psychiatrist already (the guy
she’d stopped seeing a while back), they discharged her relatively
quickly. Her twenty-sixth birthday was the following week.
It was not a great birthday. By that point she really, really, really
needed to get better. She could not countenance another trip to
the ICU, another psychiatric sojourn, that claustrophobic sense of
failure.
Then she found psychic respite in the unlikeliest confidante: a
friend of her dad’s with no formal training but who listened in a way
no one else did. “I finally found someone I can talk to and feel good
afterward. . . . It’s hard to find someone who’ll actually listen to you.”
And she started doing research. It was revelatory.
“I thought I was alone the whole time. I never knew that many
people, millions of people, suffer from it every day. . . . It’s like a
silent illness no one wants to talk about.”
She worked up the courage to tell people. Friends and family at
first. Then everyone who would listen. She made a video of her
experience, posted it on YouTube.
“I was really afraid to make that video. I made it one time and I
deleted it and then I made it again. It took a couple of weeks to actually post it.” Was taken aback at the positive response. “‘You look
fine on the outside but on the inside you’re not OK.’ That’s the kind
of response.”

236

Anna Mehler Paperny

So she kept talking. Wrote a book. Participated in a documentary—Martine Granby’s The Mask That Grins and Lies—which
screened at the Tribeca Film Festival.
It’s a redemptive story even if she knows it isn’t over. Remission
isn’t the same as cure. Recovery doesn’t preclude relapse. But “I’m not
ashamed of it anymore. . . . I wanted other people to realize they’re not
crazy, either.”

If r ace can be a barrier, so can culture. Reluctance to seek treatment for a progressively debilitating chronic illness—because you
don’t think you need it or deserve it or the shame associated with
seeking a cure seems worse than anything illness can throw at you—
means that by the time you get necessary care, the disorder’s already
had a chance to rip your guts out.
Maria Chiu, staff scientist with the not-for-profit Institute for
Clinical Evaluative Sciences (ICES) in Toronto, has seen that reticence play out along ethnic and cultural lines: South Asian
Canadian and Chinese Canadian patients admitted to a psychiatric emergency department in a Toronto hospital were in much more
acute condition when they arrived compared with others in the
psych ER with them. Chiu’s research revealed that Chinese patients
were more likely to be admitted against their will, were more likely
to be acting aggressively, and were more likely to have more than
three symptoms of a serious illness. South Asian patients were also
more likely to be showing signs of a severe mental illness compared
with the general population.9 This held true across the board. “We
controlled for everything—age, sex, income, education, immigration status, marital status, urban or rural residents,” she says. “As
well as the diagnosis, which is really important. I can’t think of
anything else we could have adjusted for, because we took into
account a lot.” 10
Culture can mediate both what a person considers a mental illness and how comfortable they feel getting help for it. Fear of what

Race as Barrier

237

seeking medical help for your mind says about you, fear of what your
family or friends or community will think of you, shame at having
this problem keep you from seeking help even if you’re pretty sure
something is not right. There may be more reluctance to share these
shameful conditions with outsiders.
“You don’t want to bring shame to the family either. And if people
feel like, ‘Oh, that’s the family of the person who’s mentally ill—avoid
them at all costs,’” Chiu says. “Then it’s also hard to find a job, it’s
hard to find a husband or a wife in certain cultures.”
Or people view this as something to be dealt with discreetly at
home, in private. “Mental hospitals in general have a bad rap. You
think, ‘I don’t want to be a psych patient: People will think I’m crazy.’”
So they try to manage on their own until they can’t, and they end up
in hospital whether they want to be there or not. Even in families or
communities that have been in Canada for generations, Chiu says,
there remains an ethos that “we have to work really hard for what we
have, we should not show weakness—these are things that you’re
taught very young, especially if you’re an ethnic minority. And so
having mental illness is seen as a weakness.”
A lack of language facility or knowledge of the health system
can act as systemic barriers to accessing care too. That’s something
you’d expect to see with relatively recent immigrants, but the
study’s findings held true whether someone was a recent immigrant, had arrived in the country more than a decade earlier, or
had been born and lived their entire lives there. “It’s the ethnicity
or the culture that seems to be more important than the immigration status. . . . You may not be as willing to share your story or
your struggle because you may not think your provider can relate,”
Chiu says.
We know that catching mental illness early can prevent it from
getting worse, can make it less likely to recur. The immediate and
long-term harms of not addressing serious health problems early are
obvious. So is the irony: By delaying care because the idea of a mental
illness is too freaky to contemplate, people deteriorate and end up

238

Anna Mehler Paperny

receiving that care in the freakiest manner possible. It affects the
health care system, because hospitalization is the most costly and
intensive treatment option out there.
And the response to Chiu’s research paper, once it was published,
is enough to indicate she’s onto something. “People shared stories,”
she tells me, “saying, ‘I’ve been through something similar; it was
hard to talk to my family.’ It’s been really, really eye-opening, and
really gratifying that it reached a wide audience.”
Her follow-up study had more encouraging findings: Even though
they show up to the hospital in worse mental shape, Chinese and
South Asian Canadians got better once they connected with care.
Chinese patients were more likely to see psychiatrists; South Asian
patients were more likely to seek mental health care from general
practitioners; both were less likely to die or wind up back in hospital
in the year following their hospitalization.11
Sometimes the way you’ve grown up, the community you’re in,
can preclude even conceptualizing a mood disorder. Clinical depression “simply did not exist within the realm of my possibilities; or, for
that matter, within the realm of possibilities for any of the black
women in my world,” Meri Nana-Ama Danquah writes in her book
Willow Weep for Me: A Black Woman’s Journey through Depression.
Danquah, born in Ghana and raised in the US, is a writer, editor, and
public speaker. “The one myth that I have had to endure my entire
life is that of my supposed birthright to strength. Black women are
supposed to be strong—caretakers, nurturers, healers of other
people—any of the twelve dozen variations of Mammy. Emotional
hardship is supposed to be built into the structure of our lives. It went
along with the territory. . . . When a black woman suffers from a
mental disorder, the overwhelming opinion is that she is weak. And
weakness in black women is intolerable. I’ve frequently been told
things like: ‘Girl, you’ve been hanging out with too many white folk’;
‘What do you have to be depressed about? If our people could make
it through slavery, we can make it through anything’; ‘Take your
troubles to Jesus, not no damn psychiatrist.’”

Race as Barrier

239

Danquah recalls the sense of disoriented invalidation she got
from her white male psychiatrist.
“Phew,” she remembers him saying after she told him about being
treated like a thief when returning a dress in a clothing store—an
act of “everyday racism” all the more galling for its banality. “It must
be so hard to be black. I can’t even fathom having to contend with
what you must deal with on a daily basis.” A well-meaning, honest
statement, sure. But that inability to fathom someone else’s experience makes therapeutic congruence just about impossible.
“I do not believe that white therapists are unable to successfully
treat people of color,” Danquah writes. “However, I do think that
they should possess a certain level of cultural sensitivity, as that
culture plays an important role in both the patient’s illness and
treatment. I am black; I am female; I am an immigrant. Every one
of these labels plays an equally significant part in my perception of
myself and the world around me.” 12

24
Who You Gonna Call?
Police are the wrong people to call when someone’s suicidal, says Susan
Stefan, an author and expert on psychiatric disabilities and the law. I
called her to get a better sense of the interplay of rights, legalities, and
first-responder imperatives when dealing with people in crisis.
“You’ll see people who call the police and they’ll say, ‘I want to
commit suicide by cop; send the police.’ . . . And what do they do?
They send over eight armed police officers.”
“You’re joking.”
“No, I’m not joking. And guess what happens. . . . When you’re in
psychiatric crisis almost anything is better than calling 911.” 1
I know plenty of people who would dispute that. And sometimes,
best option or not, calling the cops is the only source of emergency
help out there—and getting help is better than going without. Either
way, psych crisis calls make up a growing proportion of cops’ workload.
Calling first responders or having first responders called on you
when you’re in crisis is fundamentally about a loss of control: THey’re
there to take charge; you’re calling them because you want them to
take charge. I’ve talked to people who found it reassuring—that’s
the point of calling 911—but it engenders a panicky desperation
when the thing they’re saving you from is yourself.
I’ve been lucky in my interactions with police and paramedics

24 4

Anna Mehler Paperny

but I suspect it’s in part because I’m a short white girl and I was cowed
and obedient. I don’t know what would have happened if I’d struggled or yelled or talked back when I was ordered into the back of a
cop car or ambulance. Or what would have happened if I was a male
of color—in Toronto, the city where I was picked up, black people
made up 60 percent of fatal interactions with police despite only
comprising 8.8 percent of the population.2
When people call 911, they do so assuming that those whose
job it is to serve and protect them will serve and protect them in
one of the most vulnerable points of their lives. But, too often, disclosure can ostracize, can disqualify. Calling for help can make you
regret it and making people regret calling for help means they won’t
seek it again when they desperately need it.
In a given year more than two million Americans with severe
mental illness are booked into jails3 and about one in four people
with mental disorders have a history of police arrest.4 New York
Police Department dispatchers take a call for an “emotionally disturbed person” every 7.3 minutes, according to an interview in the
Christian Science Monitor.5 In Halifax, mental illness–related calls
doubled between 2007 and 2014; Calgary’s “Million-Dollar Martin,”
a sick man who cost the city about $1 million in cop calls within a
year, has achieved urban-legend status among harm-reduction acolytes.6 The recently retired head of Toronto’s civilian police watchdog has suggested the prevalence of mental illness in officers’
day-to-day jobs necessitates not just changes in training but radically different recruitment strategies—hiring officers with empathy,
who won’t freak out or revert to prejudicial stereotypes when they
encounter people struggling with psychiatric maladies. Maybe even
giving preference to those with some psychology training.7
But often, things get ugly. Sometimes, you get tasered. In dozens of
cases over an eighteen-month period in Canada’s largest city, Toronto
police tasered mentally unstable, suicidal people who posed no threat
to anyone but themselves. More than half of all Taser uses in 2014 were
on “emotionally disturbed persons,” according to cops’ own

Who You Gonna Call?

245

reporting. About a third of those people were apprehended under
Ontario’s Mental Health Act. Officers believe the people they’re confronting are armed 60 percent of the time, when in reality only about a
third (in Toronto) are bearing anything that could be used as a weapon.
Tasers are fired more often in the west-end neighborhood of
Parkdale, where I used to live, which has a higher proportion of people
with mental illness than any other area of the city. I wrote about this
in an article for Global News: “Police tasered a suicidal man twice—
once in the stomach and once in the back—‘to gain compliance’ as he
resisted being apprehended and handcuffed by officers. In one instance,
an officer tried to taser a man cutting his throat with a knife, but missed
as the suicidal man backed toward his balcony. The rest of the incident
report is censored: It isn’t clear whether the man killed himself. . . . On
multiple occasions, the suspect was tasered after already being forced
to the ground by police. One man with mental illness, believed to be
both drunk and high, was tasered three times while held on the ground
by police. Another was tasered multiple times while lying on a mattress
where he was apprehended.”8 Tasers are marketed as a “nonlethal”
weapon and much of the public discourse around their use assumes
they’re used when an officer might otherwise use a gun. That isn’t how
it works. Conducted energy weapons aren’t as reliable as firearms: If
you really needed the latter, you wouldn’t use the former. Tasers are a
step or so down the use-of-force scale and officers use them when
someone is acting violently or erratically or is resisting in some way
when they’re trying to restrain them or when they have already been
restrained. “My opinion is that if you really use Tasers at times when
you would have otherwise used a firearm, then they’re great: I’d rather
be tased than shot,” says Joel Dvoskin, a forensic psychologist who’s
designed psychiatric hospitals and trained people in dealing with psych
crises, whom I reach by phone. “But the problem is that a lot of departments, once they start using Tasers, their use of Tasers is way higher
than their use of lethal force was before. Because it’s easier.”9
We still don’t really know what the health effects of a Taser are
because the people most likely to be tased are the least healthy and

246

Anna Mehler Paperny

therefore the least likely to be included in any study and the most
complex for divining a single cause of death. People have died after
or shortly after being hit with these weapons but causation is tricky
to determine. A Reuters investigation found more than 150 autopsy
reports citing Tasers as a contributing factor in a person’s death; frequently, those people were unarmed and in psychological distress.10
In many cases where someone who is drunk or high or in the grips
of severe mental illness dies after being tased, their death is attributed to “excited delirium,” a medical condition not recognized by
most medical associations but which keeps coming up at inquests.
Whether incapacitating a suicidal someone with a painful electric
shock is a good idea depends on whom you ask. You may be saving
their life. You may be doing nothing of the sort, if they stumble and
fall off the roof they’ve been threatening to jump off or if they seize
and slit their throat with the knife they’ve been threatening to slit
their throat with. Or, more likely, in my view, you just ensure they will
never call the police or tell anyone they’re feeling suicidal ever again.
“People say it’s inhumane” to tase people who only pose a danger
to themselves, says Memphis Police Lt. Colonel Vincent Beasley,
who coordinates the force’s pioneering Crisis Intervention Team
and who talked to me by phone. “Is it really inhumane, or is it inhumane for me to sit there and watch you blow your brains out?” 11
Beasley knows what he’d pick. And it isn’t watching someone die
by their own hand.
Who should get to know about your mental illness–related run-in
with the cops? For a while, the guards at the Canada-US border
would know—and they were refusing people entry to the United
States because of their one-time suicidality. After much scrutiny
and criticism—and the threat of a lawsuit from Ontario’s privacy
commissioner—Toronto Police agreed to block US Customs and
Border Protection officers from seeing entries in Canada’s police
database. But they still enter every suicide-related call in there.12
Joel Dvoskin argues there’s efficacy in information-sharing when
it comes to people in psychological distress—but that it’s important

Who You Gonna Call?

247

to keep the sharing circle tight. “If I’m a resident evaluating somebody in an emergency department ’cause somebody said they were
suicidal and they say, ‘Yeah, you know, I was just mad at my mother;
I’m not going to kill myself. Everything’s fine,’ but I look in the database and I see he tried to grab a police officer’s gun a few days ago
and the police officer cut him a break and didn’t arrest him, now all
of a sudden that’s going to change my evaluation.”
What are the alternatives to calling the cops? Susan Stefan points
to Massachusetts’s community crisis model as one to emulate because
when someone’s suicidal, social workers and mental health practitioners show up at your door, rather than cops. Massachusetts, with its
24/7 community psychiatric crisis teams, “is basically the Valhalla of
the United States, in terms of social services”—even if there, too, you’ve
only got so many crisis teams. The state has centers with designated
crisis beds meant as an alternative to a trip to the ER and its hours-long
wait in noisy fluorescent corridors for a psych assessment. But ambulances rarely take you there, she says. Instead those beds are often used
as a “step-down” program for people after they’re discharged.
She is also a fan of “recovery learning centers,” peer-run support
centers where you can go in and talk with no fear of anyone freaking
out at your suicidality and committing you. For a contagion-theory
proponent this is a terrifying prospect: People who all want to die
talking to each other about wanting to die? Perhaps it calls to mind the
online message boards of people trading suicide methods. But she
assures me this isn’t a room of people egging each other on to selfobliteration. “Most people feel tremendously alone and isolated and
unable to talk about what they’re going through and there’s a real
benefit of saying, ‘Oh my god, I am not alone. I am not super-crazy.’”

Calling the police when you’re losing your mental or emotional shit doesn’t have to be a nightmarish ordeal. The most oft-cited
model is the Crisis Intervention Team.
Pioneered in Memphis, the Crisis Intervention Team model was

248

Anna Mehler Paperny

propelled into being by a wrenching act of violence: In September 1987,
Memphis police shot Joseph Robinson to death. The twenty-sevenyear-old black man was stabbing himself with a knife; his mother had
called police because she feared her son was suicidal. In the furor following his death at the cops’ hands, a task force was created—which is
hardly unusual. But this task force created something worthwhile that’s
being replicated in thousands of jurisdictions across the continent.
So far it’s the gold standard: forty hours of training in dealing
with people in the grips of mental illness, plus an additional eight
every year.
It gets results. Lt. Colonel Vincent Beasley tells me that in the three
decades since their CIT model was put in place, officer injuries from
interactions with mentally ill individuals dropped 90 percent; civilian injuries dropped 75 percent. About 3.4 percent of the 18,435 mental
illness calls Memphis police got in 2016 resulted in arrests (that’s still
more than 600 sick people being taken to penal facilities, though).
About 30 percent of those interactions resulted in the person being
taken to a health facility, such as a hospital; most of the time, officers
are able to de-escalate the situation and, hopefully, address what precipitated it—by letting a person vent, by buying them a hamburger
or a cigarette, by teaching their family how to cope—without carting
someone off to an institution.
About a quarter of the Memphis police officers responding to
calls have CIT training. There’s at least one officer in each precinct
at all times. It’s key for them to be the first on the scene, he says. “The
first few minutes of any situation are probably the most important
ones. So if I get an officer there who doesn’t understand this person
is suffering from mental illness, they can do tons of damage before
I get there.” In many jurisdictions, they’re only called in after conventional officers arrive and assess the situation. Or they’re only
available during certain times of day, or there’s only one crisis intervention team for an entire city.
He got crisis intervention training a quarter-century ago because
he saw firsthand the skills he was missing.

Who You Gonna Call?

249

“In the area I worked in there were quite a few people who were
suffering from mental illnesses. And I’m thinking, ‘Hey, I’m answering these calls anyway. Why don’t I learn about this so I can better
serve those individuals?’”
What did he learn about people on the brink of suicide?
“They’re fragile. And they want to commit suicide, but they
don’t want to commit suicide. . . . We just want the opportunity to
talk to them.”
The need for this training was driven home when Beasley’s
nephew Jacques killed himself. He was twenty-four. “He was a grandmama’s boy, and just a great kid. Really. And I’m not just saying
that. When he was five years old he memorized every page of a fortyeight-page book on Dr. Martin Luther King. And he went to every
kindergarten school in the city of Memphis on a little circuit because
they could not believe it.”
But when Jacques was in college the grandmother who helped
raise him died. And things began to fall apart. “I noticed it, but I
didn’t notice it,” Beasley says. He asked his nephew if everything was
OK and when Jacques said yes, he didn’t press it.
“He taught me a lesson: to not take no for an answer. . . . I saw
some of the same things in him that I saw in other people who were
suffering from mental illnesses. But I didn’t want to see that, because
that was my nephew.”
Just about every urban police force in North America will probably
claim to have implemented or glanced at the CIT’s principles to some
degree. But there’s tremendous variation in how good or effective or
compassionate they are. A few years ago I visited a Toronto Police training center and watched a de-escalation role play in which officers armed
with Tasers talked down a man sitting at a table with a knife, threatening to kill himself. In that dramatized scenario, they were successful:
He surrendered the plastic knife and they exited the mock apartment.
The center’s classrooms were festooned with handwritten instructions
on how to talk someone down: Speak softly; ask nonaggressive questions; repeat what people have said back to them in a validating way.

250

Anna Mehler Paperny

But this is also a police force that tased a woman after she dropped
the knife she’d been holding to her throat; that shot to death a mentally ill man with a hammer within 120 seconds of entering the apartment hallway where he was standing. Who shot to death a man in a
hospital gown holding scissors in the middle of a street. In moments
of crisis, people don’t always act in the way they would in a training
module. When I spoke with Toronto police officers in charge of the
frontline teams dealing with the mentally ill they noted that, of
the thousands of interactions they have with people in crisis, the
overwhelming majority go well.13 And they’re right. Or, at least, most
interactions don’t end in death.
But is that good enough? Alok Mukherjee doesn’t think so. The
former chair of Toronto’s Police Services Board has argued for cop
recruitment that focuses on compassion, on individuals’ ability to
work with people who are different from them; on “more people
who say they’re coming into policing because they want to help
people, fewer who say they are here to catch the bad guys.”
Crisis intervention trains officers to go slow. But “police officers
are trained to go fast, not slow,” Joel Dvoskin, the forensic psychologist, points out. “All the things police are trained to do—speak in a
commanding voice; don’t ask questions, give commands—none of
that helps when a person’s suicidal. So they have to kind of unlearn
some things.”
He figures there are two factors in the most acute suicide-­
prevention situations: options and time. If suicide is an escape from
intolerable pain, finding an alternative escape, even a shallow transient one, can help. And stall. Stall for time in the hopes the most
violent self-destructive impulse will attenuate just slightly.
“[If] you can keep them alive for a while, sometimes their natural
defenses kick in, they start thinking of other solutions,” Dvoskin
says. If nobody dies, then you win.

25
How to Talk about What We Talk about
When We Talk about Wanting to Die
Imagine trying to cure cancer, or find an AIDS vaccine, or end world
hunger or forcible human displacement, without ever mentioning
the thing you’re tackling. For ages that’s been our approach to suicide, to the point that even the people paid to prevent it are loath to
say its name.
Decades have conditioned us to avoid talking to someone about
wanting to kill themselves, lest it seem like the act of discussing it is
encouraging that act.
For many people, professionals and laypersons alike, the instinct
is to dissuade—to plead, implore, exhort, Don’t do that! And that’s
a legitimate response. And some people will want to hear that, or
will at least take comfort in knowing people care about them and
want them to live. “I’m glad you’re alive” or “The world is better with
you in it” are, I would argue, better ways of phrasing “Enough
with this suicide!” But if your first response to someone’s suicide
attempt or their confession to wanting to die, is to say, “That’s
bad!” it can ensure that person never brings it up with you or anyone
else ever again. No one wants to be lectured on the shittiness of their
desires, no matter how self-destructive. “Family members will do
that all day long. . . . Families are families. But clinicians, clinicians
should be different than families,” says David Jobes, a psychologist

252

Anna Mehler Paperny

at the Catholic University of America. “Don’t kill yourself!” is a valid
emotional response to someone you care about. Clinician responses
are not supposed to be fear- or emotion-driven. “You don’t talk about
the weather. You talk about, you know, you’re here for a reason, and
that reason is about life and death, and let’s look at that.” 1
Crappy as we are at figuring out who has killed themselves, we’re
far worse at figuring out who’s in danger of doing so. Much as I
loathed being locked up against my will, I understand the excruciating nature of that calculation: Is she about to prance out of here and
off herself? A 2016 study found clinicians evaluating suicide attempts
in Winnipeg emergency rooms were laughably bad at guessing who
was going to try again. Experience helped. Standardized assessment
tools didn’t.
Clinicians who went with their guts were 10 percent more likely
to accurately predict a subsequent suicide attempt than clinicians
who used a fancy-pants scale. People with more psychiatric experience were better at estimating reattempt risk. But not by much.2
Yunqiao Wang, one of the study’s coauthors, expected accuracy
rates to be low. As a psychologist with a practice of her own, she’s
seen how challenging risk assessment is. But she didn’t expect them
to be that low, she tells me by phone.3 She knows the horror stories
of people who kill themselves within twenty-four hours of discharge. Keeping them just a bit longer, to assess them a bit more
thoroughly, might make a difference. “It’s not enough to just, you
know, ‘Check, check, check, you meet the criteria’ and then
you’re released.”
Further complicating the prognostication game are people who
“use suicide almost as a gesture”—a dramatic cry for help. There
were a few people like that in the psych-ward rooms beside mine.
Some had checked themselves in because they needed a respite from
the responsibility of staying alive. Others, especially in the longerterm ward, cycled through repeatedly because they had nowhere
else or nowhere better to go. Wang can understand this perspective
but it irks her. “Crisis intervention is not a hotel.”

How to Talk about What We Talk about . . .

253

Aaron Beck, one of America’s most prominent psychiatrists and
the father of cognitive therapy, formalized suicide risk factors into
a scorecard: the seriousness of your attempt (Did you really think
it would kill you? Did you really want it to?), the degree of premeditation (Did you put your affairs in order? Did you leave a note?), and
the degree to which you tried to keep anyone from intervening (Were
you alone, did you lock the door, did you wait for a moment when no
one would notice your absence? Did you tell anyone?).4 “It’s a really
complicated set of variables you have to factor in. But still, you’re not
going to be 100 percent right,” says Paul Kurdyak at CAMH.5
Trust him: He’s been there. One patient, in her midthirties or
early forties, told him everything he needed to make him feel he
could let her go. So he did. And she killed herself within hours.
“Thankfully it’s incredibly rare. But it is devastating.” It can be brutal
for staff psychiatrists to make discharge decisions knowing both how
unreliable and how potentially deadly their best judgment is. “That’s
why I have a deep sense of humility about the task at hand.”
When the Toronto family doctor Javed Alloo faces the challenge
of sussing out a suicidal patient’s likelihood of obliterating themselves before their next appointment, he’ll ask if they’re planning on
killing themselves but knows that isn’t enough on its own. “If they
have interests and if they’re feeling engaged with life, with hope of
any kind, then I feel safer.” 6 And he’ll look at nonverbal cues—
obvious ones, like the consistency of their answers, and ones that
would never occur to me: Which way are their feet pointing? Are
they responding to questions in a way that’s different from the
way they would normally respond?
One of his longtime patients with a history of chronic, near-­
debilitating non-mental illness ended up in the ER after overdosing
on her medication, and he knew she was bullshitting when she told
emergency staff it was an accident. “I’m like, no, she did it on purpose. Because she’s not the type of person who makes mistakes.”
The next time she was sitting across from him in his office, he didn’t
mess around.

254

Anna Mehler Paperny

“‘So, why’d you do it?’ It was a purposely provocative question.
She kind of looked at me and started to get ready a glib answer. And
I just said, ‘I know. So just tell me why you did it.’ And then she told
me. She told me, ‘So I wouldn’t be sad.’”
So he started her on depression treatment, and she stuck with it.
His bold query made their doctor-patient relationship more open.
“I felt more scared not asking the question than asking the question.”
Of course it would be easier if there were a biomarker or a neurological test you could give someone to figure out how likely they
are to try and kill themselves at some point in the future. “In cardiology,” the National Institute of Mental Health’s Sarah Lisanby
points out, “we have EKGs, we have stress tests, we have ways of
knowing if you are likely to die from your heart disease. We need
the same for brain diseases. We need the same to know that this
person in front of us, who is suffering from depression, is actually
dying of it, is on their way to a future suicide.” 7
It sounds fanciful to me, or at least far away. But Maria Oquendo,
past president of the American Psychiatric Association, does think
it’s possible. Some people who attempt suicide, she says, produce
inordinate amounts of the hormone cortisol when they’re stressed,
and you can test for that in saliva. But even if you could disaggregate
normal cortisol stress responses—if you’re late for something or
unprepared or otherwise stressed out—from super-high ones, that
test wouldn’t capture everyone. Some people’s desire to die may be
tied to abnormal serotonin systems and weirdnesses around receptor density. That’s cumbersome to test for now, but she’s confident
that in a decade, that will change.8
Meanwhile, a group of researchers announced in 2017 that
they’d designed a machine-learning algorithm that would read
neural signatures of people’s fMRIs, which measure brain activity
by tracking changes in your blood flow. This could differentiate not
only people thinking of suicide from people who aren’t but people
who’d attempted suicide from those who were just thinking about
it.9 This sounds futuristic and super cool, but as someone whose

How to Talk about What We Talk about . . .

255

liberty would likely be compromised by such a device, I’m leery.
Apart from anything else, this still wouldn’t tell you who is imminently going to try to kill themselves compared to those who just
think about it all the time. If it worked it would no doubt flag me
based on past actions and current ideation—but I’m not about to
kill myself right now and I would absolutely object to being forcibly hospitalized as a result of such a scan.
We know more about what works and what doesn’t work when it
comes to treating people who want to die. It mostly involves talking
to people about why they want to die and trying to help them deal
with those things in a way other than death. That may sound obvious but it’s a dramatic departure from the way clinicians—and just
about everyone else—approach suicidality now.
“Typically, suicide is something that makes everybody uncomfortable, including clinicians,” says Tom Ellis, the former senior
staff psychologist at the Menninger Clinic. “So there’s a really
strong emotional pull on both parties’ part to change the subject:
‘Let’s talk about your family; let’s talk about your job; let’s talk about
various aspects of your life; but get off this business of wanting to
die.’” 10 That strategy’s not super efficacious. So he seeks to attack
suicidality directly. “Let’s prioritize, first and foremost, helping this
person to survive.” To do that, “we really need to understand what
is beyond the disorder.” He sits with patients and writes down what
fuels their hopelessness and desire to die. “So it’s very, very concrete, and very explicit.”
People often know what their triggers are, but either way the therapist will talk things through with them, maybe suggesting things
they aren’t verbalizing even to themselves quite yet. He then develops a written safety plan with them “that says, you know, ‘Let’s see:
What are your typical warning signs that you’re about to go into a
suicidal crisis? What sort of things have you learned in therapy that
you can apply?”
But the evidence suggests that a short-term intervention won’t
keep a chronic illness at bay for long. It’s not enough to make

256

Anna Mehler Paperny

someone feel life is worth living for a week or so, only to have them
try and kill themselves a few months later, as several people in both
the test and control groups did in a study Tom Ellis conducted. I’ve
talked to people who felt way worse descending into despondency
after a period of non-shittiness, because being reminded of the delta
between hope and despair makes the latter that much more acute,
the desperation to escape it that much more pressing.
Thing is, Catholic University of America psychology professor
Dave Jobes says, you don’t need that intensive inpatient environment.
He designed a treatment model he calls Collaborative Assessment
and Management of Suicidality that can be used in nonspecialist
outpatient settings—like your family doctor’s office. He argues that
talking directly to patients about the reasons behind their desire to
die would save health systems a massive amount of money. “We call
it sharpening the driver. . . . We ask the patient, ‘What are the things
that make you feel like you should take your life?’”
But asking if someone is thinking of killing themselves isn’t
enough if you ask the question the wrong way.
Wrong way: “You’re not thinking of suicide, are you?” That’s
“leading them to a null answer,” says Brian Ahmedani, director of
psychiatry research at the Henry Ford Health System. “Saying the
question that way says, ‘I want you to say no.’ And, even further
upstream, it tells the patient, ‘I don’t even want to know about it if
you are.’ I mean, who’s going to say yes, you’re having that problem,
when someone’s led you?” 11
Yes, suicide is scary. But it’s OK: THere are guides available that
walk clinicians through, word for word, how to ask a patient about
it. One is called the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) and it’s
just a check-the-box list of nine questions.12 (I’ve gotta say, though,
that the suicide-related question is terribly worded: “Over the last
two weeks, how often have you been bothered by thoughts that
you would be better off dead or of hurting yourself in some way?”
At first glance it sounds like you’re asking if the person has been
bothered by thoughts they’d be better off dead OR be better off

How to Talk about What We Talk about . . .

257

hurting themselves. And every reporter knows double-barreled
questions are the devil: THe interviewee is going to pick whichever’s
easier to answer—in this case, I’d go for hurting myself as the easier
option to cop to. But also, thinking you’d be better off dead is not
the same as wanting to kill yourself or thinking about doing it—the
latter is much more active and, I’d argue, far more lethal.)
I’ve heard a lot of clinician variations on the suicide question.
“Have you been having thoughts that life is not worth living?” was
one of my psychiatrist’s favorites, along with, “Have you been thinking of ending your life?” Another psychiatrist favored “Do you feel
safe?” which sounds more like the kind of thing I’d ask myself before
heading out on my bike at night, or that I’d ask a Muslim friend
living in the United States in 2019. My bias favors compassionate
bluntness: Have you been thinking about killing yourself? And, if
the answer to that one is negative: Have you wanted to die at all in
the past X days/weeks?
Yes, it’s uncomfortable to discuss. But the stakes are too high
not to.
There are times when wanting your own death is seen not as pathological but as a rational decision, a choice to which you are entitled.
It’s telling, though, that the kinds of pain North American society
acknowledges as so unbearable as to make death an acceptable choice
don’t include the pain caused by mental illness. In Canada and in
some US states, a doctor can legally help you die if you have terminal cancer, but not if a mental illness is wrecking your life. That could
change—there will likely be court challenges of the mental illness
prohibition on medically assisted death—but a proper discussion of
what that might look like, of how a doctor would distinguish between
a desire to die driven by a disorder’s skewed thinking and a desire to
die driven by a rational assessment of what a disorder is doing to your
life, is beyond the scope of this book. It is no doubt a question society will have to answer: Why does the pain of people who are crazy
carry less weight than the pain of those who are not?
∙∙∙

258

Anna Mehler Paperny

Tr eating debilitating depr ession without addressing
­suicidality is “like treating a heart attack by saying someone needs
to lose weight,” Ahmedani says. “If you only treat the weight loss . . .
and you don’t also put them on cholesterol medication, give them
nitro, give them other types of interventions for the heart attack . . .
it may not be effective.”
If changing the way you do things to drastically improve the
answers to such questions as “Will patient kill themselves?” and
“Will patient cycle in and out of the emergency room dozens of times
before killing themselves or being indefinitely institutionalized?”
isn’t your style, there are a few basic changes that could make a difference.
For one thing, stop it with the stupid “no-suicide contracts.” Yes,
this is a real thing: You make a sick person sign a paper saying they’ll
stop doing the thing the illness keeps making them do. They’re about
as effective as telling someone with cancer to stop letting their cells
reproduce in a disorganized and uncontrollable way. Some institutions implement these kinds of contracts because it makes them feel
better from a liability perspective, as though they’re less likely to be
sued if patients kill themselves because they made them promise
not to kill themselves. Spoiler: THis ass-covering gambit does nothing to cover your ass. If someone can prove you knew or should have
known a patient was a danger to themselves, you’re open to litigation. Especially in the US. It can also destroy any trust between a
suicidal person and their clinician if the clinician gives the sense
that any such behavior will be met with punitive action. The prospect of being accused of breaching a contract, legally unbinding as
it may be, certainly wouldn’t encourage me to open up. “Patients
know that it’s only a piece of paper and that signing that is not going
to change the fact if they’re in a desperate place,” Tom Ellis says.
“It’s just so naive on the surface, it’s hard to imagine it took hold the
way that it did.”
If all this sounds like it should be a given, you haven’t talked to
people who’ve been the loudest self-harm authorities in popular

How to Talk about What We Talk about . . .

259

culture over the past half century—those who think the mere mention of suicide is enough to send people plunging off cliffs like angsty
lemmings. This queasiness is closely connected to contagion
theory—the idea that exposure to the very concept of self-inflicted
death will cause others to commit suicide when they wouldn’t have
considered it before. That mentioning or publicizing suicide will lead
impressionable individuals—kids and teens, especially—to just off
themselves, has been dogma for decades. People refer to the “Werther
effect,” after Goethe’s eighteenth-century novel The Sorrows of Young
Werther in which the protagonist kills himself—and which, supposedly, gave rise to a slew of copycat suicides across Europe. Even academic researchers have had to confront ethics boards who have
freaked out at the thought of talking to suicidal people about their
suicidal thoughts for fear that would result in lots of suicides. “This
is a common concern,” Tom Ellis tells me. “It doesn’t happen.” He
maintains that people actually tend to be relieved to be able to talk
about something that is so consuming them. (Yep: I can confirm.)
“This is on their mind anyway. It’s not something we’re creating out
of thin air.”
The truth is, it’s complicated. A 2014 study of dozens of teen suicide clusters (a cluster being anywhere from three to eleven deaths)
between 1988 and 1996 found that suicides that received prominent,
detailed newspaper coverage—especially celebrity or teen suicides—were more likely to be followed by a “cluster” of three or
more teen suicides.13
The first thing that came to my mind on reading this study:
Whoa, teens read newspapers! (And it’s killing them in awful ways!)
But seriously—even here, causation’s tough to suss out: Only a
quarter of the communities where the suicide clusters occurred
had local coverage of that first suicide. That suggests that most clusters happen without prior precipitating coverage.
It’s also important to keep in mind, I think, that the suicides in
this study took place well before social media and the internet were
a thing. It’s become easy to find websites and forums where suicide

260

Anna Mehler Paperny

is glorified, where you’re given a how-to, without ever having to pick
up a newspaper. “It’s much harder [for us] to do research with social
media. It’s so amorphous,” Madelyn Gould, an epidemiologist
behind the suicide cluster study, tells me over the phone. “There
are a lot of causes and the media definitely has an impact but so
does just hearing about [suicide], being exposed to it if you’re vulnerable.” 14
News coverage still matters but not always in the way you might
think. There was a decrease in suicides immediately after Kurt
Cobain’s death.15 The weeks following a pair of highly publicized teen
suicides in the Ottawa region in 2010 and 2011 saw a spike in the
number of young people presenting to a children’s hospital emergency department for mental health reasons. The seriousness of their
conditions hadn’t worsened, though, suggesting extensive but sensitive media coverage that emphasized the role mental illness plays in
suicide may have spurred kids and their families to seek help, enabling
more youths to receive needed services.16
Mario Cappelli studied the incident. “You could not have publicized those two deaths any more than they were publicized and
we had no increase in suicides. Media . . . talking about suicide keeps
mental health at the forefront, right? And that’s not a bad thing.” 17
Sensationalistic reporting is always irresponsible; if you can’t
report on something empathically, compassionately, contextually,
you shouldn’t be a reporter. Are there irresponsible ways to talk
openly about suicide? Of course. Valorizing, glorifying, referring to
“successful” suicides versus “failed” ones; talking about someone’s
bravery in killing themselves—none of that shit helps. Don’t do it.
It should be common sense not to rhapsodize a tragic death resulting from a debilitating disorder. And, for all the suicide reporting
guidelines out there, there are legitimate ongoing concerns about
what constitutes responsible coverage. Some news orgs provide
contact information for crisis lines and similar at the end of their
suicide-related stories, which strikes me as a good and useful idea
but it’s no substitute for good journalism.

How to Talk about What We Talk about . . .

261

Madelyn Gould believes the key is to approach suicidal ideation
as a treatable symptom of mental illness rather than a way to solve a
problem or the reasonable, inevitable resolution of a shitty situation.
“I definitely wouldn’t want to see it on the front page. And I wouldn’t
want to see extensive coverage.” Here is where we differ: I believe it’s
possible to responsibly put suicide on A1 and to portray it, as Gould
suggests, as a failure of treatment rather than a glamorized or sensationalized end. (She also thinks stories on the front page should be
about hope and recovery. Maybe we need more of that. But bad news
is still news; it’s our job to make sense of it.)
What galls me is the way contagion freak-outs infantilize human
beings with agency. The urge to kill oneself arises from deep-seated
despair that goes beyond any blip in public discourse or news cycle
obsession. Andrew Solomon in The Noonday Demon likens suicide
contagion to a hungry person seeing a restaurant and going inside.18
With all due respect, this makes no sense to me: Even if the hungry
person doesn’t see the restaurant the hunger persists; and if it persists they will probably feel impelled to sate it. Pretending they aren’t
hungry, acting as though this hunger will go away on its own as long
as no one acknowledges its existence, does no one any favors. For no
other public health crisis in the world would you suggest that ignoring its toll would make everything better. But for a long time, that’s
how the media approached suicide.

How pr evalent is the stone-in-your-gut feeling, the nonplussed
sense of loss, of having someone you care about kill themselves?
I’ll never forget the wonderful woman at Pfizer’s switchboard who
answered one of my first requests for an interview with the big
pharma company, and who sounded as if she was all ready to pass
me on to someone who would shoot down said request, but stopped
as soon as I told her what I’d be asking about.
“This is a really, really, really important and great topic. I had a
friend who killed himself a couple years ago and I’m always trying

262

Anna Mehler Paperny

to figure it out. It touches everybody, so I’m always interested in what
kind of insights people can come up with. Because, to me, I’m still
left with the idea that he didn’t mean to, you know? I mean, he was
just overwhelmed, and that’s sort of what happened.
“So. I’m going to redirect your call.”

26
Certifiable
Picture in your mind a mental hospital, a psychiatric ward, an asylum
for the insane. If you grew up in North America in the mid- to latetwentieth century, One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest probably comes
to mind first. Maybe you also think of the film Girl, Interrupted.
(Remember when Angelina Jolie, as edgy fascinating pseudo-­
sociopath, was still something of an unknown quantity?) Maybe you
read Janet Frame’s chillingly good stories, based on her own psychiatric incarceration, of New Zealand madhouses, or Life magazine’s
depiction in “Bedlam 1946” of torturous conditions in American
mental hospitals—men and women beaten to death by staff, halfstarved, crowded into under-resourced institutions. Maybe you were
struck by nineteenth-century woodcuts of people naked, chattering,
wild-eyed, chained to the wall and wallowing in their own filth.
The imprinting of those images on the collective psyche drove
decades of deinstitutionalization—an en-masse emptying of
those long-term facilities for disordered minds. It also drove transinstitutionalization, as legions of people with mental illness were
discharged to the street and, without necessary care, were arrested
and ended up filling prisons instead.
The idea was to replace that inpatient treatment with outpatient
community resources to get people care before they got seriously
ill enough to need inpatient treatment. At the time, advances in

264

Anna Mehler Paperny

psychiatric medicine seemed guaranteed, population-level prevention of mental illness a real possibility. It didn’t work out that way:
In 1960s America, legislation intended to drastically draw down
(state-funded) psych hospitals and establish (federally funded) community mental health centers resulted in much more of the former
than the latter. Community resources couldn’t meet the needs of
severely ill people who were now, in many cases, left on their own;
where the needed resources existed, the links between hospitals
and outpatient facilities did not.1
More than half a century later this remains the case. And now
the pendulum’s swung the other way. It’s become fashionable for
many clinicians and public health experts to decry society’s aversion
to housing crazy people in places that’ll keep them safe from society
and—more to the point—society safe from them. The latter argument has been emphasized by doctors like E. Fuller Torrey, whose
book American Psychosis laments the lack of institutions, bolstering
its argument with a parade of anecdotes and statistics of the grisly
crimes committed by violent crazies. (Yes, as discussed, these individuals compose a minuscule minority of people with mental illness
and are far more likely to be victims of crime than its perpetrators.
But don’t mess with the narrative.)
Meantime, many jurisdictions, including Canada and the
United Kingdom, are coercively treating people at a much greater
rate than they did a decade ago, when most of the people filling
Ontario’s psychiatric hospital beds were there of their own volition.
That’s no longer true: Between 2008 and 2016 involuntary admissions rose 82 percent. Between March and December of 2016, a
thousand people a month were hospitalized against their will
because of a mental illness.2 There are different flavors of coercive
care and each one is increasing.
Time for some stats. Deep breath: THis is important. In Ontario
the number of people put on a Form 1 (the seventy-two-hour hold
I was put on after my first attempt) jumped 62 percent in eight years.
The number of people put on a Form 3 (the two-week forcible stay I

Certifiable

265

was put on) increased 63 percent. Monthlong forced stays, Form 4,
more than doubled during that time. The number of admissions per
patient also rose, which means more people are being hospitalized
against their will multiple times a year. Overwhelmingly, they’re there
because they pose a danger to themselves or are deemed unable to care
for themselves—not because they pose a danger to others. The use of
involuntary hospitalization is rising most steeply among the young.3
You still have rights when hospitalized against your will—you
have a right to a lawyer to help you challenge your committal, for
one thing. You still have the right to refuse treatment, although that
can be formally taken away. And the percentage of psychiatric inpatients being forcibly treated has also risen: Its share of admissions
increased about 15 percent over eight years. But coercion in one
domain bleeds into others: Part of the reason I agreed to start taking
antidepressants despite my—admittedly irrational—misgivings was
because I knew my release from hospital, my return to work was contingent in no small part on my good behavior, on my impressing upon
my captors that I was truly trying to get well. I know I’m not the only
person who’s made that calculated, pressured choice.
These are big increases. And a big deal if the rights to freedom of
movement and integrity of the person matter at all.
The trend holds true in British Columbia, where involuntary hospitalization jumped 54 percent in seven years and went from representing the minority to the majority of all psych inpatients. Here, too,
they rose most among young girls.4 It’s true in Alberta, Saskatchewan,
Manitoba, and Nova Scotia. It’s true in England, where compulsory
hospitalization increased 64 percent in two decades.5 It’s true in
Germany, France, Austria, and Finland.6 In the United States, mega
hospital networks have been accused of committing people who don’t
meet any defensible criteria as a way of boosting their profits by billing insurers.7,8 Meanwhile, researchers in California found that an
increase in state funding for mental health resulted in a reduction in
fourteen-day holds—suggesting, they wrote, that the added funds
“may have facilitated the discharge of clients from the hospital by

266

Anna Mehler Paperny

providing enhanced resources and access to a range of less-restrictive
community-based treatment alternatives.” 9 What does this tell us?
You get what you pay for; you get what you incentivize. Targeted
investment makes involuntary hospitalization less necessary while
seemingly benign models of care create feedback loops of coercion.
This goes double for marginalized populations.
As compulsion rises, it discriminates: People involuntarily hospitalized are more likely to be poor, unemployed, less educated;10
they’re more likely to live in poor areas;11 they’re more likely to be
persons of color. Black people in England are almost three times
more likely to be involuntarily hospitalized than white.12 In Ontario,
black people are also overrepresented among people placed on
Community Treatment Orders, which impose mandatory conditions on your discharge from hospital, requiring you to take your
meds, attend appointments, and follow doctor’s orders or be committed.13 This disparity could be because people with crappy access
to care to begin with are more likely to deteriorate to the point at
which coercion becomes necessary. It could be because we more
readily rob of autonomy people who are marginalized to begin with.
Could be both. It does certainly raise questions about quality of
care, equality of care, and possible violations of human rights.14
What’s going on with the increase?
It’s not entirely clear. But we can see that in some jurisdictions
the number of coerced psychiatric hospitalizations is rising as the
number of psychiatric hospital beds drops.15 The flipped ratio between
voluntary and involuntary admissions is fairly intuitive—when you
have fewer beds they’re going to go to the most acute cases, and those
are often going to be the ones that need or are seen to need hospitalization against their will. People may be trying to get into hospital
voluntarily only to be turned away. But the absolute number of psych
inpatient admissions has gone up, too. People are being hospitalized
more often: Involuntary visits per patient are up. And more people
are deteriorating to the point where they won’t seek treatment even
if they desperately need it.

Certifiable

267

In a fee-for-service model of care, there’s also a financial incentive:
Physicians in Ontario get $105 for filling out a Form 1. I’m loath to
think doctors are depriving people of their freedom to make a buck,
but hospital-level anomalies suggest the question has to be asked.16

Anita Szigeti’s name strikes fear in the hearts of people who
commit people for a living. The Toronto lawyer and staunch civil liberties advocate agrees insufficient beds and other treatment resources
are at issue but her solution is less compulsion, not more. Her job is
to fight for her clients’ rights and autonomy against those who would
hospitalize or treat them against their will for their own good. She challenges committals at Ontario’s Consent and Capacity Board, seeking to
emphasize her clients’ civil liberties ahead of the state’s responsibility
to help people who can’t help themselves. She’s notorious enough
among Toronto-area shrinks that when my psychiatrist saw her name
on a book I was reading (A Guide to Consent and Capacity Law in Ontario
is no beach read, but is very thorough), his eyebrows rose. She is busy.
But she is not popular. Where psychiatrists see a necessary, underutilized way to improve the lives and prognoses of people who don’t know
their lives need improvement, Anita Szigeti sees a setup stacked against
the most vulnerable patients who, no matter how severe their illness,
still have rights that are all too easily ignored.
She contends in our chat that most of her clients shouldn’t be
committed to begin with. Many are held for reasons outside their
control and outside the elements of their illness—they don’t have
housing to go home to, for example, or can’t access intensive out­
patient treatment that could keep them out of hospital. And anything
more than a few days’ institutionalization can make you lose the supports you had when you were out, making it even riskier to discharge
you: You can lose social assistance, lose your apartment, lose your
job, lose touch with whatever social connections you had on the outside. “I don’t blame the doctors; they’re clinical caregivers. They want
their patient-client to get better. They think they can help them.” 17

268

Anna Mehler Paperny

Psych wards are no longer Bedlam caricatures or Nellie Bly’s madhouse. Inpatients have rights and, more importantly, provisions are
in place for maintaining them. (Whether those provisions are followed to the letter is another story.) There are protocols for the ways
you’re treated and what you’re treated with and, overwhelmingly, the
people who work in those wards—in my limited experience and from
what I’ve heard of others’—are decent and compassionate individuals. But in some ways the places we put the insane still fit Ken Kesey’s
stereotype. The longer-term ward I stayed in featured putty-colored
floors and walls and ceilings, doors that didn’t close, and windows
that didn’t open but were crosshatched with metal mesh nonetheless.
There was a common area with tables for eating or playing board
games and a smaller alcove with a TV mounted near the ceiling whose
channels were the purview of the tall. Windows fitted in the doors to
patients’ rooms and outside light switches made it easy for nurses to
check on you at odd hours of the night, cutting short whatever scrap
of sleep you could summon. The mandatory activities were selfparodies, as were weekly meetings where patient-inmates sat in a circle
and discussed living conditions. Years later the hospital built a new
lounge with money from a generous donor—games, better couches,
books, Ping-Pong. Ping-Pong! I cannot adequately express my happiness that this exists.

How do you decide when someone’s too crazy to make decisions?
My most naked personal bias in this regard is decidedly libertarian. I want to throw open auto-locking psych-ward doors and cry,
“Go free, crazy people!” But I’ve spoken with enough disconsolate
relatives and health care workers, and seen enough devastating
sequelae of treatment forgone, to understand why this is a bad idea.
So how do you make that assessment? Take, as an example, the state
of Arkansas, which requires past noncompliance with treatment in
order to involuntarily hospitalize someone who poses a danger to
themselves or others, or whose inability to treat themselves and

Certifiable

269

impaired understanding of the need for treatment puts them in danger
of deterioration. Colorado adds the possibility that a person “cannot
manage resources or conduct social relations,” or that they’re losing a
caregiver. (If having trouble socializing was enough to get a person
forcibly hospitalized, I doubt there’d be many people walking free.)
Hawaii includes people in danger of inflicting “substantial emotional
injury to others.” (Um, who isn’t?) In New York State, involuntary hospitalization requires a person pose a danger to themselves or others,
require “essential” treatment AND be unable to fully grasp why.18 It’s
hardly a hospitalize-the-crazies extravaganza, although I know
plenty of online commenters who think it should be.
Depriving someone of some rights means you have to be even
more vigilant about protecting the rights they still have. But clinicians do sometimes fail in that regard. A March 2019 report from
British Columbia’s ombudsperson found the province’s hospitals
were ignoring the rights of people involuntarily hospitalized. Legally
required forms were missing, late or improperly completed.
Sometimes physicians failed to explain why the person met the criteria for involuntary admission. Most involuntary patients got no
rights advice form, and many had no chance to consent to
their ­treatment.19
A slip as simple as failing to fill out paperwork properly can trap
you. In my second time through the psych ward post-suicide, the
statutory countdown to my freedom should have started on my
admittance to hospital. No one filled out that paperwork. The countdown on my Form 1 only started a day later, as I got settled in my
curtained-off psych-ward abode. The prospect of another seventytwo hours without natural light or fresh air, after having spent the
previous twenty-four hours hospitalized and the forty-eight before
that holed up in my apartment (“Yes, but whose fault was that,
Anna?” “Not helpful, Mom.”) was too much to countenance. Seventytwo hours is an eternity. And no, it isn’t the same as spending an
entire weekend in your apartment because going outdoors is too
much effort: In your apartment you’re left to your own devices and

270

Anna Mehler Paperny

you feel like you’re there by choice, even if the choice is pathological.
And, in your apartment, there’s a motherfucking window. In theory
I could have appealed my committal to the staff psychiatrist. But it
was a Saturday afternoon, and I felt badly about it—I knew enough
to know that the psych on call over the weekend is usually swamped.
Late Sunday afternoon I lucked out, as someone persuaded the
harried on-call individual to come visit the ward’s whiny patientinmate. I promised not to run away or dash into traffic, to stay as a
voluntary patient for as long as my doctor(s) felt necessary, if he would
just take me off that form. He acquiesced. I can’t overstate how validating that felt. I was still a crazy person housed in a modern-­day
loony bin, talking to nurses and social workers about my Thoughts
and Feelings and answering daily suicidality questionnaires. But now
I could wear pants. I could come and go at will, as long as I informed
my keepers where I was headed and when I’d be back, checked in at
shift change and didn’t abscond for more than a couple of hours at a
time. More than that, I regained a sense of agency: I was a competent
adult making my own decisions about my health care. If this comes
across as semantic nitpicking, you’ve never had your autonomy
snatched or curtailed because you’re too nuts to be trusted. Later I
asked my psychiatrist why I wasn’t offered that same voluntary inpatient status after my first suicide attempt. He said I’d have been a bad
candidate for it: I’d made clear I wanted to leave and was at too high
a risk of killing myself to be taken off the form. He then astonished
me by saying he probably wouldn’t have taken me off the form the
second time around, either, for the same reasons. Yes, I had said I
wanted to stay, but I had just made a serious suicide attempt and had
a history of similar. It wasn’t that he didn’t trust me, he said: He didn’t
trust the mood disorder. The news that my psychiatrist would have
kept me locked up came as a blow. It also made me all the more grateful to that doctor who’d made the risky but, for me, enormously lifeameliorating call to set me free.
Apparently you can make psychiatric advance directives—instructions about what to do, where to take you, what your wishes are should

Certifiable

271

you descend into psychic crisis. You can designate power of attorney
or a substitute decision-maker who calls the shots when you can’t; you
can specify treatment preferences. “It’s basically the same instrument
for health care decision-making that would authorize a living will,”
says Jeffrey Swanson, who is a psychiatry and behavioral sciences professor at Duke University in Durham, North Carolina. Except you’re
still alive when people are supposed to follow your directives. “They’re
basically designed for people who lose capacity to consent to their own
treatment and to give people the ability to plan ahead.”20 In the US,
about twenty-five states have some kind of legal framework governing
psychiatric advance directives. They also have override features.
But take note: If you’re rushed to the ER after a serious suicide
attempt, no one’s going to respect your “Do not resuscitate” directive. I’ve asked both my own doctor and others about this beguiling
option. No dice.
But I figure these directives’ limited legal weight is outweighed
by the act of writing them. It lets people assert a degree of control
over something disturbingly outside their control. “It’s the empowering function of sitting down and documenting, ahead of time, your
own preferences,” Jeffrey Swanson says. “It’s kind of like a psychi­
atric résumé—what you look like when you’re in a crisis, who should
be notified, what medications you’re allergic to. . . . Even if they never
used it, they feel more empowered. Just like you might feel better
having an insurance policy even if you never use it.”
Subsumed by such an agency-stealing disease, we need all the
empowering we can get.

Ther e ar e a million indignities involved in being hospitalized
against your will—but one thing that came up in my interviews with
both the committed and the committers was that there are degrees
of crappiness when it comes to losing your freedom in this way. It’s
unpleasant but it doesn’t have to be degrading. It’s agency thieving
but shouldn’t mean losing your right to due process.

272

Anna Mehler Paperny

De a n na
Deanna remembers the darkness of the psychiatric hospital in
Kingston, Ontario, where she spent the better part of four years. Not
from an absence of windows, although what portals there were, were
barred. But a dark greying sense of remove from the outside world.
And a disquieting quiet that her three children pierced when they
raced down the long echoing grey hallway that was almost always
empty. Mandatory activities included cooking and enforced socialization that she only periodically had the energy for. The ancient
elevator creaked each time she took it to the hospital basement for
electroconvulsive therapy.21
She was paralyzed with fear of being admitted not just to a psychiatric ward, but an entire hospital dedicated to the care and warehousing of the mentally ill. Institutionalization was terrifying on its
own but the prospect also reinforced her conception of herself as
unwell, unfit, unable to care for those she loved or be the person she
thought she was. “I couldn’t imagine that that was me and my life—
that things had fallen apart to the extent that I needed hospitalization. Not only did I not trust myself, in terms of my safety and my
care, but my doctor didn’t.”
Deanna’s first stint as a psychiatric inpatient lasted nine months
before she showed a marginal improvement and went home. “But it
didn’t last. I was only home for about six weeks and then I was back
to hospital.”
So it went. Deanna figures she lived in hospital for 85 percent of
the subsequent four years, exhausting a glossary of drugs and other
treatments.
“I couldn’t do anything. It was hard to get dressed. It was hard to
shower. It was hard to eat.” She’d set out on a staff-chaperoned walk
outdoors with other patients, along the shore of Lake Ontario, only
to find herself depleted within a block and escorted back inside.

Certifiable

273

Leslie
Of her first New York City psych ward, Leslie recalls Band-Aidbrown walls, ceiling, floors. No handles or doorknobs. She lost her
privacy and her phone and, with it, any lifeline to her loved ones
outside the hospital.
“The environments they put you in would make you want to kill
yourself, too,” she tells me. “There you are, in a room, there’s nothing on the wall to look at, it’s plain and it’s old and the paint’s chipping, there’s no curtains on the wall ’cause they’re afraid you’re going
to hang yourself. It’s convent-style living without a cross on the wall,
’cause they’re afraid you’re going to jab someone’s eye out. . . .
“Imagine, if you can, how demeaning it is to be in this hospital
room that is so banged up and then walk into a shower that is covered with mold and there is only cold water, no hot water.” 22
Always, there were roommates. Some better than others: Leslie
found herself living beside “a lovely, lovely woman” who thought she
was a high-powered insurance firm executive; another said she was a
go-go dancer. But the lack of privacy and the prevalence of sleep-filching noise were a nightmare. “There was one woman next door to me
that would throw furniture against the wall at night. . . . And there’s
some that just roam around the hallway babbling to themselves and
they don’t control them. You can’t sleep. You literally can’t sleep in those
circumstances. They wake you up every half hour. You can’t recover.”

Cindy
Cindy isn’t sure she wanted to die when she slit her wrists in her dorm
room in the first semester of college in Iowa but it was enough to get
her under round-the-clock scrutiny in a psych department affiliated
with her school.
“Oh god, it was terrible. . . . I was under suicide watch, so they had
to come check on me every fifteen minutes. I was not allowed to

274

Anna Mehler Paperny

shower alone. There was a phone in my room but the cord was
extremely short—I had to sit at the desk hunched over to make any
calls. . . . I remember one of the girls that was there, she too had a lot
of cuts and scars on her arms. Hers were much worse than mine and
I remember sitting there thinking, ‘I shouldn’t be here.’” 23

Multiple times every day Andrew Lustig has to decide whether
the person in front of him is too unwell and too unable to understand
their own unwellness and in too much danger as a result to be let out
on their own. The psychiatrist at Toronto’s CAMH works in an urban
psych ER with a large number of acutely ill patients. His office is in a
building whose halls are blocked off by auto-locking doors, and when
I visit, the patients I see—mostly men—seem more out of it
than ­dangerous.
“The most important question you answer in the emergency
department is, ‘Do they stay or do they go?’—and that really hinges
on the issue of risk: How risky is this person, and what bad things
are likely to happen if they leave the hospital today?” 24
It’s a tricky calculation. He wants to get at not just why and how
they ended up in the psychiatric emergency department that day,
but also at their history of mental illness and of hospitalization. Have
they been in treatment? Have they been in the hospital before? Have
they harmed themselves or others in the past? Like any good journalist, he tries to get multiple sources to create a picture—the person
themselves; whoever brought them to hospital if they didn’t come
on their own; any close family or friends he can track down. He’ll
ask if the person has been thinking of killing themselves, whether
they’re planning on doing it, how they’d do it. He’ll watch the person
closely to see if their affect and behavior match their words. Invariably
they’ll have an agenda: Either they want to be admitted or they don’t,
and they’ll act and answer questions accordingly. So Lustig listens
to what they say but doesn’t take their word for it.
Doctors don’t have much time to decide whether to put someone

Certifiable

275

on a seventy-two-hour hold, so often that commitment is out of an
abundance of caution, he tells me—to keep someone safe in case
they may harm themselves, but just as importantly, to give clinicians
the chance to observe the person under a great deal of stress. You
learn a lot about someone by how they cope in that kind of crisis
hospital environment, where they’re deprived of their belongings
and their ability to smoke or decide when to eat and when to sleep.
It’s at this point in the interview that I learn that while CAMH,
like my hospital, doesn’t let anyone on a seventy-two-hour hold outdoors even on escorted trips, it does let them wear real clothes. You
can keep your own clothes?! You can hear, in my audio recording of
our conversation, my poorly masked incredulity, my indignation still
fresh more than two years after I was denied my own clothing while
certifiable. “It’s interesting,” he muses. “I spoke to an ethicist about
that here once and they said they thought that was unethical to take
away somebody’s clothes. It’s quite dehumanizing to have to wear the
hospital clothing.” YES. Thank you. I brought this up later with my
psychiatrist, who said forcing people to wear hospital gowns is a precautionary measure in case they escape: makes them easier to spot.
Many, many, many times, Lustig will let someone go who isn’t
well, who would benefit from care, but who doesn’t meet the legal
criteria for committal. It drives family members mad.
“I cannot tell you how many conversations I have with angry
families where I’m letting the person go,” he says. “The family is
yelling at me that they’re going to sue me if something bad happens;
I just repeat: ‘I understand. And I’m sorry. But it’s not really up to
me—these are the criteria. . . . Just because they’re angry or they’re
going to lose their schooling or lose their house, I’m sorry but I can’t
detain someone on those grounds.’”
No one likes to admit they make treatment decisions about an
individual based on the needs of someone else. But it’s inevitable,
says Joel Dvoskin, the forensic psychologist. “So if Joe comes in, and
is at an acuity level of eight, and I admit him and I settle him down
to a five and you say, ‘Well, you really should be around a three to get

276

Anna Mehler Paperny

released,’ but I don’t have any empty beds and at my front door is
Sam and he’s a ten. . . . There’s pressure to release people maybe when
you would have rather waited a few days.” 25
“Of course” it’s better to get more people into treatment of their
own volition, says longtime involuntary treatment advocate E. Fuller
Torrey. But he says the number of people being committed, either
on an inpatient or outpatient basis, is reprehensibly low. “I’ve been
told probably two hundred times if I’ve been told once, ‘If you want
to help me, doc, just call the CIA and tell them to stop the voice in
my head.’ . . . So what do you do with someone who has no awareness of their illness?” 26
Short of death, which is rare but not rare enough, perhaps the
most damaging outcome of involuntary hospitalization and treatment is a toxic all-consuming mistrust—of psychiatry, psychiatrists,
the medical profession. Of everyone. Of oneself. I’m sure some
people emerge from committal in a better mental state and genuinely
grateful that someone saved them from themselves, but I know for
a fact that coercive treatment sours some people on medicine for life.
Torrey knows hospitalizing and treating someone against their
will fosters a lifelong mistrust of psychiatry that means people never
seek out or trust a clinician ever again. He contends the benefits of
humane coercive treatment for people in need of an intervention outweigh the costs of that deep mistrust, even if he doesn’t know how
to dispel it.

Does coercion work?
Depends whom you ask and what you’re looking for. Where outcomes are better, it’s hard to tell whether you couldn’t have gotten
that improved result without coercion.27
People are less likely to kill themselves while under close supervision in a medical institution than they are outside of it, although hospital suicides do happen: THere were 548 deaths in Ontario psych
wards between 2008 and 2016, 24 of them suicides.28 So if you keep

Certifiable

277

someone in the hospital when they might otherwise have killed themselves, you’ve saved a life. And if you frame your choice as being
between detention and death, you will err on the side of detention even
if the possibility of death is relatively slim. But detention is not without its perils. And there’s no control group for a human being: It’s
impossible to prove someone would have killed themselves if set free.
One of the reasons all this is difficult to measure is that a person
who doesn’t trust their clinicians or lives in fear of getting into trouble with them is unlikely to tell those clinicians when things are going
badly. “People do better when they’re committed,” Joel Dvoskin says,
“but it’s not clear that they’re doing better because of the coercion:
It may be that they’re doing better because of enhanced services that
could have been provided voluntarily.”
Then there’s the you’ll-thank-me-for-this-later trump card.
“People who are admitted involuntarily, the vast majority of those
individuals at a later point will say, ‘Yes, that was an appropriate
decision,’” says Richard O’Reilly, a psychiatrist in London, Ontario.
“I agree we should try to provide service in the community. But our
general hospitals, our local community hospitals, are community
resources. And their job is to keep people safe.”
Not everyone rages against being forcibly treated. In a 2013
Huffington Post op-ed, a woman named Erin Hawkes compared a
patient without insight into their mental illness to a toddler who
thinks it would be fun to play with knives. “Though some psychiatrists rely overly on their psychopharmaceutical powers, my brain is
in fact too sick to heal on its own,” she wrote. “Please, someone, make
choices for me when I cannot: choose to give me the treatment that,
for me, has worked in the past. Medicate me. Don’t leave me to
myself; I will play with those knives, and may not learn until I bleed
to death what harm I have the ‘right’ to do.” 29

Mental illness pits the rights of sick people against the desires
of their loved ones more than maybe any other ailment. People

278

Anna Mehler Paperny

want their family members to be taken care of, kept safe; an individual has rights to liberty and, when that is deprived, to integrity
of the person unless that, too, is suspended. People want to know
everything about what is happening to their loved ones and how
they’re being helped and what happens next and what else can be
done; an individual has rights to privacy, even when that means
shutting out the people closest to them. Each jurisdiction has its
own rules on when to override a person’s privacy, when it’s OK to
tell confidential things to kin, and who gets to know. I’ve talked to
plenty of family members who’ve raged against roadblocks to
knowing what’s going on with the people they love.
Daryl Geisheimer was at his wit’s end—he couldn’t get a straight
answer from the nurses or doctors caring for his son, Brian, in the
hospital after a suicide attempt, he told a coroner’s inquest after his
son walked out of the hospital and in front of a train. “I was trying
desperately to get involved, to volunteer my availability and say, ‘I’m
surely part of this program. I’m the parent.’” 30
The system failed Brian and his family at numerous junctures. It
appears one of them was communication. But even there, Brian’s
consent would have been needed to share confidential information
with his parents.
It can be a crazy-making trap, trying to get even the most basic
information about a loved one who’s been spirited into a locked psych
ward. It drove my parents nuts, those first few days in hospital and
beyond, that sense of enforced helplessness and ignorance: THey
wanted to be involved in my care—they were there, after all, camped
out in the hospital for as many hours a day as they were allowed to
be—and were told in no uncertain terms that my right to privacy as
an adult did not include parental disclosures. “I didn’t have any
resources,” my dad recalls. “We were just winging it. We were desperate. We were frantic. We were scared.”
But it’s all too easy to override a person’s right to privacy when
that person is someone unwell whom you love. Mark Lukach’s book
My Lovely Wife in the Psych Ward expresses the enraging heartbreak

Certifiable

279

of caring for someone with severe mental illness better than just
about anything else I’ve read. It also exhibits that easy override: He
sits with his wife in the triage room as she answers a nurse’s questions on her first emergency room visit, and speaks for her when her
answers are unsatisfactory. This is benign and ultimately helpful:
His testimony is far more reliable than hers. But it made me squirm:
I’d have hated that, were I in her shoes. When she’s in remission and
he tells her she can’t go to a concert because it would involve staying
up late and probably driving and, when she resists, retorts, “I do get
to tell you what to do,” 31 he is being prudent and probably right but
still I winced, vicariously infantilized, yanked back in time to pacing
the wet sand on the Lake Ontario beach, yelling at my parents about
whether I could be trusted to make decisions.
Here, again, my bias shows. Having something as basic as the
right to confidential health information trampled is intensely dis­
empowering at a particularly disempowered moment in your life.
During my second psych-ward sojourn, my parents met my psychiatrist. Fine. They came back to visit me in my curtained-off bed space
saying the nice doctor had told them my next treatment option could
well be electroconvulsive therapy. I was livid. He’d never mentioned
that to me. Even if he had, I wouldn’t have been comfortable with
him discussing potential treatment pathways with my parents. This
probably sounds like an overwrought reaction, and it’s largely a
matter of principle: I talk to them about all this a fair bit, fairly freely.
But on my terms. This small, seemingly meaningless admission was
profoundly destabilizing.

Sur ely it’s possible for involuntary status to be rendered moot
because the patient decides to stay of their own accord. You just need
to win them over.
How do you persuade?
Making hospitals less awful would be a start, Andrew Lustig
says. Better programming, a comfortable environment, the ability

280

Anna Mehler Paperny

to get fresh air. Some facilities actually have fenced-off green space
of some kind where people can go but where they can’t run away.
(The balcony in my longer-stay psych ward would have made an
enormous difference in my quality of life, if only it had been open
for more than five minutes a day, or whenever we could prevail on
the nurses to let us breathe.) Talk to the patient like they’re a human
being. Like you’re on the same side. Try to establish a degree of
trust. Explain to them why you want to take whatever interventions
you think are necessary, and what you hope that will accomplish.
It’s not enough to say, “This will make you better.” What is better?
How will this intervention get you there? In other words, “being
empathic—listening, hearing what they have to say, taking an interest in their lives. Not just walking in and saying, ‘Here, you need
this medication,’ but clearly communicating to them you want to
help them get better and having them believe that.”
Clinical compassion is more crucial here, arguably, than it is in
any other field of medicine. Lacking insight into your illness puts
you and your doctor at odds from the beginning. “If someone breaks
their leg, there’s generally agreement between the orthopedic surgeon and the patient that the leg is broken, right? But if somebody
has schizophrenia, oftentimes the physician’s view is, ‘You have
schizophrenia.’ And the patient’s view is, ‘I don’t have schizophrenia,
but people are following me and they want to harm me.’”
That doesn’t mean you have to force the patient into things. “The
most helpful thing to do,” Lustig concludes, “is, I think, to find something where you—the doctor and the patient—can agree on what the
problem is. So maybe you can’t agree that the diagnosis is schizophrenia, but maybe you can both agree the person is under a lot of stress
and that taking this medication will help alleviate the stress.”

“Do you want to spend a few days in hospital?”
It was the first time he’d asked me that. My doctor. In five and a half
years of treatment, during which I’d confessed—with 100 percent

Certifiable

281

honesty, I swear—every need for death at my own hand, no matter
how fleeting or interminable or nightmare compelling, whether during
insomniac nights or a sudden midday emotional blow to the chest.
We had a deal. One he’d initiated, not me. He’d promised not to
commit me. There are few therapeutic gifts more valuable, engendering more trust. Maybe none. It makes it possible, even natural,
even therapeutic to tell someone about your desire to kill yourself
when you trust them and when they take you seriously and when
you know your honesty won’t be punished. It made it possible for
me not only to tell him I’d stocked up on aspirin with the intention
of overdosing but to pull out the bottle of pills to show him.
So now I was telling him about intense suicidality that commandeered my nights and intruded on my days and my commute and my
work, a telescoping anxiety that paralyzed me and convinced me I
was in the midst of a psychotic break. (He said I wasn’t. So there.)
And now he was asking about, offering, an inpatient stay. Because,
he said, he figured I wouldn’t ask for it myself if I wanted it. Which
was true but also maybe overly optimistic on his part: I couldn’t
imagine a return to the short-stay psych unit with my nurse friends
who remembered me better than I remembered them. I couldn’t conceptualize that as anything but a surrender to misery or, if I was
unspeakably lucky, a chance to will myself into endless catatonia—
the next best thing, I figured, to total obliteration. Even when the
possibility of surrender seemed a relief, the prospect of reentering
the real world after even a short, even a voluntary stay, took so much
out of me I could not imagine mustering the wherewithal to do it.
Transitioning from psych ward to real world as an attempted
facsimile of a normal person is, for me, like racing to climb onto a
train hurtling at full speed. Many people I’ve spoken with say they
checked themselves into hospital because they didn’t trust themselves with themselves. It was such a relief, they said, to give this
responsibility to someone else. At the very least it offered respite
from that oppressive impossible weight. Maybe a chance to recover.
And I get that. And I’m so jealous. A respite I understand. But how

282

Anna Mehler Paperny

do I bounce back? I couldn’t. I can’t.
So I didn’t go. And his offer, his question, both petrified and comforted me. Petrified because it was without precedent and because
of that it seemed to indicate an unprecedented fear on his part.
“Oh shit. Did I alarm you?”
“Do I look alarmed?”
But if he were not, why would he have suggested I check myself
in before I wreck myself?
Comforted, though, because it was such a respectful way to ask
a scary thing. He didn’t tell me. He didn’t even say he thought I
should. He just asked. This, again, was its own invaluable gift.
A doctor’s orders needn’t come across as orders.
“I think, as a profession, psychiatry has probably lost a lot of its ability to just talk to the clients,” Anita Szigeti tells me. “And I think we’re
definitely seeing force and forced medication where we don’t need to,
if a doctor had better skills at just therapy and communication.”

Abby’s first-ever psychiatr ic session ended with her being
hospitalized against her will. She then spent a decade cycling through
involuntary hospitalization and involuntary outpatient treatment.
I call her Abby; she didn’t want any part of her real name used for
this project. She’d be discharged, often into homeless shelters,
arrested after a burst of rage or erratic behavior, formed, and hospitalized again. She felt scared and disrespected—as though nobody
was listening to her or cared to try. Like a nightmare where you talk,
yell, and no sound comes out. The swift loss of agency, the forcible
treatment, the physical and pharmacological restraints, left lasting
psychic scars. Made her vacuum sense of isolation worse. Poisoned
any future therapeutic relationship. Talking to me a dozen years later,
Abby acknowledged she had issues with mental illness, anger
management. She had breakdowns, would “flip out” and kick walls
or mirrors, wave a knife, try to slap doctors away or kick her mom
off her hospital bed. She finally got out of the hospital for good when

Certifiable

283

she signed—coercively, she argues: What choice did she have?—a
Community Treatment Order agreeing to semi-weekly injections
that went on for years until finally her doctor said she’d been doing
so well he would let her off the treatment order if she agreed to take
a low dose of an antipsychotic (olanzapine, the same one I was on a
couple of times) voluntarily. She kicks herself in hindsight for not
realizing earlier that her relationship with clinicians could have been
collaborative rather than coercive.
She wishes someone had made clear this was an option.
Psych wards can save lives. They can provide a safe place to stabilize and, as they did for me, an on-ramp to longer-term out­patient
care. Sometimes some people need to be hospitalized even if they
don’t want to be. But our use of coercion is increasing and it isn’t
benign; it’s the kind of thing whose consequences you’d want to
think twice about.

27
Trust Issues
You can have an awful doctor in any sphere and it can fuck with
your trust for life. Surgery sucks. Intubation is awful. Chemotherapy
is harrowing. But why is mental illness the only sphere of medicine
characterized by a deep mistrust of caregivers and caregivers’ profession? Cancer foundations are multibillion-dollar industries yet
it’s depression—the world’s leading cause of years lost to disability, which boasts no Ice Bucket Challenge or money-making marathon, which gets fewer public dollars, and whose practitioners
make less than the average medical specialist—that’s derided as a
marketing-driven capitalist fiction.

laney
Trapped in a suicidal morass, Laney’s son did the supposedly
responsible thing. He told his mom to take him to the hospital. She
did. He checked himself into a psych ward. As the son of a social
worker in Virginia he knew what he needed and what he did not.
But then everything went wrong, his mom says. The staff was
domineering, locked him in seclusion for asking, jokingly, if a
grumpy-looking staff member needed a hug. Eventually he unlocked
the door with his credit card, walked out and asked to speak with the

Trust Issues

285

head nurse—and for a copy of his rights. They tried to grab him; he
ran; they took him down, put him in restraints, forcibly injected him
with an antipsychotic. He was committed the next day. His parents
attended the commitment hearing, begging for him to be let go.
No dice.
His mother still can’t quite wrap her head around it. “They beat
the shit out of someone who was feeling suicidal and wanted to go
someplace safe.”1 The committal still haunts her son, she says. He can’t
own a gun. An IT and computer systems specialist, he was turned
down for a federal job (he was working on contract and trying to jump
to a full-time gig) because the committal came up on a background
search. He hasn’t accepted medication since. He hasn’t forgiven her.
Refused to talk to her for eight years, then relented and let her visit
once a year, on Christmas Day. He has a son now, named after her
father. Laney (not her real name) has met her grandson twice. “I guess
he felt betrayed. And he thought it was my fault.” She doesn’t know if
he’s ever tried to kill himself. If he’s ever wanted to. “He basically said,
‘I’m never going to tell you again if I feel suicidal.’” She asked me to
change her name and not to name him for fear of upsetting him.
She hasn’t forgiven herself. “Frankly, I don’t blame him for feeling like I had led him into the lion’s den. As much as it breaks my
heart, I don’t blame him. I wish I hadn’t done it. I wish I had said to
him, ‘Let’s keep you at home and I’ll keep you safe at all costs.’ It
would have kept his dignity. It would have kept his humanity and
his self-determination. It would have accepted who he is as a person.”
She certainly hasn’t forgiven the health structure that did that to
him. “And what happened to my son is nothing compared to other
people. Nothing.” She knows. She started out as a social worker in
what she calls a “mental health ghetto”—an area where people were
discharged from psychiatric wards into an abyss, sans supports:
single-room occupancy units or group homes or the streets. Now her
advocacy for the most vulnerable mentally disordered individuals
runs counter to a system she sees failing, abusing, and infantilizing
them in ways that border on criminal.

286

Anna Mehler Paperny

During a placement for her master’s degree in social work, she
says, she got an “eye-opening” look at the gap between the advocacy
work that interested her and the care provision that was the status
quo: “The ‘I know best for you; I know what you need better than
you do.’ . . . I was confused about how to make it a more empowering experience for such a damaged population.”
She became a shit-disturbing crusader, “muckraking with hospitals,” pushing for better community care and going after what
she saw as systemic screwups in the state mental health systems
where she’d gotten her start. She briefly headed Virginia’s chapter
of the advocacy-oriented but largely institution-friendly National
Alliance on Mental Illness, but moved on to work at the more
radically psychiatry-­skeptic National Coalition for Mental Health
Recovery.
What Laney preaches is itself not so different from what many
public health advocates want to see: more robust community-based
outpatient care. “We believe in intervening before it’s too late.”
But she’s sick of seeing mental health budgets swell and ebb like
tides pulled by the force of political moons. She’s sick of the merrygo-round of one-off funding infusions that never last long enough to
change much. She’s sick of coercive care, and to her, now, all psychiatric hospitals are inherently coercive. “They just are, under the best
of circumstances. . . . I am opposed to inpatient care. I think there’s
no way to fix it.” She’s sick of clinician attitudes to people deemed
mentally ill. “I despair at the mind-set of other mental health professionals—particularly in inpatient settings. And I think that, you
know, coercion and ‘You will do what I say’ and ‘I know better than
you do’ and ‘You’re behaving badly so I’m going to punish you for it,’
I think it’s really nearly impossible to get rid of that mind-set.” For
this reason more than the myriad shortcomings and side effects of
the best-intended treatments, “survivors don’t want anything to do
with psychiatric services.” She’s sick of families supporting laws
expanding involuntary hospitalization or treatment because they
see no other hope for their loved ones (or themselves). “Families have

Trust Issues

287

been so completely failed by the mental health system that they have
concluded that forced treatment is the only way to help their family
members get better. I don’t think family members understand what
actually happens” when people are committed. “They have no idea
the nightmare has just started for their loved ones.” And she’s sick
of people calling psychic suffering a sickness. Sees it as one more
thing pushing coercion: “If you’re sick, you can’t take care of yourself. You’re a helpless person. I don’t call them illnesses. I would call
them conditions.”
I’ve encountered this argument before. I understand the sentiment but now disagree with the conclusion: Calling something an
illness forces you to take it seriously, to devote resources to it. An illness can be outside a person’s control without that person being out
of control—therefore untrustworthy, unfit for autonomy—as a
result. But when the illness outside your control is a mental one, the
crucial differentiation is often blurred.
Much as you might disagree with Laney’s conclusions and her
indictment of the entire field, it’s tough to argue with her mantra
for fixing mental health care. “Make it voluntary. Make it attractive.
Make it effective. Make it humane.”

It’s not unusual to find extreme psychiatry skeptics. The
Ontario Institute for Studies in Education (OISE) at the University
of Toronto, the biggest postsecondary institution in Canada, now
has an antipsychiatry scholarship. “Given the overwhelmingly and
disproportionate availability of ‘regular’ scholarships for studying
issues related to psychiatry,” the scholarship’s website reads, “equity
and academic freedom themselves require that antipsychiatry
scholars, including exceptional ones, have more equitable access
to scholarship support.” 2
I know a lot of serious-minded people who think this is a deeply
harmful idea. Bonnie Burstow, the author-activist who endowed
that scholarship, is not looking for their approval. She wants to see

288

Anna Mehler Paperny

electroconvulsive therapy criminalized, antidepressants and other
psychotropic drugs banned, and psychiatry as a field extinguished.
The things we call “mental illnesses” are not illnesses, she says, but
“problems living.” (I can confirm they are most definitely that.)
Antidepressants and electroconvulsive therapy are so damaging,
she claims, that “if they told you the truth, no one would take the
treatment. What psychiatrists do with depression . . . is not only not
meaningful, it should be a crime against humanity. Because it takes
healthy people and seriously brain damages them for life.” 3
It’s understandable for people who’ve dedicated their lives to
caring for those with depression to be less than tolerant of such
maddening misconceptions. But strident smackdowns aren’t helping. When Charles Kellner at Mount Sinai in New York dismisses
people worried about losing memories to electroconvulsive therapy
as being silly at best or Scientology stooges at worst, that doesn’t
win anyone over.
There are reasons why mental illness is a sphere of medicine so
characterized by mistrust.
Antidepressants, for example, have a bad rap in large part because
clinician, researcher, marketer pronouncements about the way they
worked overstated their certainty, simplicity, and efficacy.
“I think sometimes, to explain things to people, we have maybe
oversimplified things . . . using ‘chemical imbalance’ to explain things
to people, using the analogy of not having enough insulin, etcetera,”
Husseini Manji, Janssen Pharma’s global head of neuroscience
therapeutic area and the man behind Janssen’s ketamine experiments, admits to me. “I think some of the oversimplification was
done with good intent. And I’m guilty of it. Because with things like
depression, often people seem to think, ‘If I only tried harder. What’s
wrong with me?’ And you almost want to say, ‘No! It’s not you.’” 4
No one’s known much about depression treatment in the history
of treating depression. So once researchers and clinicians found something that appeared to effectively treat depression, they explained it
and sold it to governments and the public (and perhaps to themselves)

Trust Issues

289

on a reverse-engineered mechanistic explanation that made sense at
the time but hasn’t held up to scrutiny.
This overstatement of psychiatric certainty when it comes to
understanding the way depression works has become one of antipsychiatry’s most effective weapons. Gary Greenberg, author of
Manufacturing Depression and coiner of the delicious Blakeian
phrase “you're finally seeing what’s dark and Satanic about the
depression mills,” 5 isn’t afraid to wield it. But when you press him
he’s cool with the idea of depression as an illness, as long as you
don’t insist on bringing biology into it. “I actually think an illness,
a disease, is better understood as a rhetorical device than as a biological category. It provides us with a way to decide how to allocate
social resources: A disease is a kind of suffering that deserves social
resources, and social resources can include research, drugs, compassion, money. Is depression a legitimate disease by that definition? Absolutely.” 6
Most psychiatric researchers and clinicians—certainly everyone
who specializes in the neurology and neurochemistry of depression—
would understandably refuse to abandon the idea of depression as
a medical disease with an identifiable (even if as-yet unidentified)
pathophysiology, especially as neuroplasticity and neurocircuitry
appear to offer potentially illuminating avenues of inquiry. But at
the patient level, does it matter? Does it do anyone any good to argue
with a patient over the pathogenesis of their illness if your common
goal of remission doesn’t require anywhere near that unanimity?
I talk to my doctor and follow his advice because I trust him, not
because he has or claims to have all the answers as to where depression comes from or how it works or even how these drugs work.
Arguably he’s a better psychiatrist because he’s so straight up about
his profession’s uncertainty.
Paul Kurdyak at CAMH is on board. “A lot of practitioners will
say to patients, ‘We’re giving you Prozac or Zoloft or whatever because
it increases the serotonin in your brain and that’s what’s going to
make you feel better.’ I think that’s a highly reductionist explanation.

290

Anna Mehler Paperny

I say, ‘It seems as though you’re depressed. I’m going to prescribe a
medication that, according to the evidence, has the best balance of
efficacy and side effects.’ . . . I like saying that, because it’s honest.” 7
Gary Greenberg is cool with the idea of psychiatrists psychiatrist­
ing, so long as they’re forthcoming about what they know and what
they don’t know and their rationale for pursuing the treatment modalities that they do. “If every psychiatrist would just go and say, ‘OK,
here’s what your symptoms are: You’re not sleeping, you’re not
eating, blah, blah. The thing that I’ve found, in my experience, helps
those symptoms is this drug. And I have no idea why.’ . . . If a doctor
was just to do that with a patient, it might diminish the placebo
effect but . . . it might also increase trust and intimacy with the
doctor and that might actually make their depression better. There
might be more honesty. If there’s honesty going in one direction
there might be honesty going both ways. Who knows?”
But why is it radical—why does it even need stating—that a professional who deals with the most intimate and vulnerable aspects
of human selfhood should be honest and open about what they’re
doing and why? Should treat patients as people, as partners in care,
rather than as a flawed mental vessel needing their unadulterated
expertise, no questions brooked?
One thing I’ve heard (and seen) over and over is how much deeper
an understanding people have of mental illness once they’ve gone
through it themselves (directly or indirectly via someone they love).
Any experience cuts closer when you know it firsthand. It follows that
health practitioners care better for depressed and suicidal people if
they’ve been there. But imagine if the only competent oncologists were
ones in remission for cancer; if the only decent obstetricians were ones
who’d given birth; if only the superannuated could be geriatricians
and a neurosurgery prerequisite was having had someone slice into
their own brain. Surely the very starting point for trained clinicians in
a “caring profession” is basic human empathy—and learning! And putting learning into practice!—to be able to provide adequate, evidencebased mental health care and not be insensitive assholes about it.

Trust Issues

291

Even Bonnie Burstow, who endowed the antipsychiatry scholarship at OISE, agrees that paralytic despair, impenetrable suicidality,
psychosis benefit from intervention—she just favors psycho­therapy,
exercise, social supports over drugs, and other medical interventions. The mode of therapy she extols—enlisting suicidal people as
“co-investigators” examining their despair and alternate ways out of
it—is strikingly similar to that advocated by David Jobes and others
pioneering the Collaborative Assessment and Management of
Suicidality model. I suggest to her that she’s perhaps not so philosophically different from the psychiatrists she holds in contempt.
They both recognize something is wrong. They both think things
can be done to alleviate the wrongness, to help make life better or
bearable. Both favor an intervention, backed by evidence, that puts
the patient in the therapeutic driver’s seat.
Mistake. “It is a huge philosophical difference to believe things
are diseases of the brain and to believe that people have problems
living that they need help with. It is an unbelievably big philosophical difference.” She pauses. “You haven’t read my book, have you?”
You know you’re in huge trouble, as an interviewer, when someone
is asking whether you’ve read their book. (And, full disclosure, I
had not. I’ve since read several, those she’s written and a couple
she’s edited.)
I do understand the rejection of the very idea of mental illness, a
repudiation of any medicalizing of the mind. Many people reject the
idea that the things that make them unique creatures are reducible
to a series of electric impulses. (Although it sounds pretty gorgeous
and cool to me.) And, as a patient, whether you classify the thing ripping you apart as an illness or you don’t doesn’t change what it does
to you and your life; it doesn’t change which interventions alleviate
the awfulness and which don’t. It does, however, change your ability
to access interventions and it changes incentives for funding research
into new ones. It changes the rules around who provides which interventions and who gets to decide what to call the thing ripping you
apart. That’s worth making a fuss over.

292

Anna Mehler Paperny

Illnesses get coverage. Treatments for illnesses get research
resources. People with illnesses have a shot at time off work. People
with chronic illnesses and disabilities have rights under human rights
codes. Philosophical debates and professional turf wars are well and
good until they impinge on individuals’ ability to get care that works,
to get respect and compassion.
Whether or not you believe that chronic mood disorders are the
result of a faulty brain, the need to classify these despair-states as illnesses and treat them as such remains.
But people don’t seek treatment they don’t trust. The most strident, consistent, compelling objections to psychiatry in general
and depression in particular—the science is perceived to be a sham;
the treatment is seen as harmful and coercive—are rooted in legitimacy. Industry and clinicians have overstated depression drugs’
efficacy and oversimplified the way depression works. There are
side effects to all medical interventions, some more serious than
others. People with mental illness or people believed to have mental
illness are hospitalized and treated involuntarily. But none of this
means that depression isn’t a real, debilitating illness. Depression
is a genuine and genuinely awful condition; we just don’t understand
it. Drugs, psychotherapy, electroconvulsive therapy, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, exercise, all work on some people to
some degree. Depression’s treatment toolbox remains inadequate.
Coercing people into getting care is crappy no matter how necessary it is (and people will always disagree as to what justifies that
suspension of basic liberty; this is why recourse is important). What
this means is that failing to address psychiatry’s credibility problem means people will go untreated or undertreated or die.
“It wouldn’t be psychiatry” if it didn’t involve losing people’s trust,
Bonnie Burstow says. I’d like to believe that’s wrong. Because if
losing trust is a necessary part of a given field of medicine, it is a bad
field of medicine.

Trust Issues

293

Pa t r ic k
Patrick had been a mess for more than half his life. On good days, he
sleepwalked through the motions; on bad days, he was paralyzed by
anxiety and self-recrimination.8
It started in ninth grade. He became lethargic, lost energy. Fixated
on a growing list of his own shortcomings, things he needed to fix
within himself to make everything better. Learned to cope with a
subsuming sense of worthlessness by retreating into mental haze.
“I was kind of out to lunch,” he says. “Normal situations gave me
anxiety. So I avoided them.”
That fog makes it hard, even now, for him to recall specific events
in his past. It’s like he’s straining to observe the details of someone
else’s dream. Chronic mental illnesses mess with both the way you
perceive your world and your ability to recall it later. Many of my
more intrusive personal interviews for this book were exercises in
frustration as I prodded people to recall episodes distorted by cognitive biases and glitchy memory systems.
“All I have to do,” Patrick told himself over the course of decades,
“is solve this endless list of things and then everything will be better.
You very much tend to blame yourself for all these symptoms. You
feel you’re worthless. Yeah, it kind of sucked. But it was just my daily
life. I still managed to do things, but I didn’t do very well. I didn’t
really talk to anyone, didn’t do well socially, didn’t date. Just trying
to get through the day. It was a slog, basically. It was a huge slog.”
Outwardly, he was coping. Excelling, even. Graduated from university with a degree in political science. Spent years teaching
English in Korea, backpacking across Southeast Asia. “I was trying
to get away from my problems but I just brought my problems with
me. Kind of like wherever you go, there you are.”
He worked as a temp for the Ontario government, as a bike
messenger, managing an inventory yard at a construction site.
Sought treatment when his motivation was robust enough not to
be eclipsed by the hurdles and wait lists. Saw a family doctor “who

294

Anna Mehler Paperny

was totally afraid to write any kind of prescription at all,” waited
five months to see a psychiatrist for what felt like a “weird, useless
kind of consultation.”
“A lot of psychiatrists are just jerks. Like, they’re very condescending. . . . The bedside manner was usually very cold and dry. A
lot of them, I couldn’t even get a word in. It was a very mechanical
kind of process. And those are the kind of people who are telling me
to go on medication.” How could he trust them?
Patrick went on and off antidepressants for a few years. Mostly
off. In part because they never kicked in before his own self-loathing
convinced him the issue was himself and his failings—“just a few
problems I need to figure out”—not his illness. In part because of
a deep-rooted aversion to psychopharmaceuticals reinforced by the
information he sought out online.
“You’re still afraid of the side effects, even though the side effects
really are nothing compared to depression itself. Like, I was talking
to one guy on the internet, on a forum. He was in his late thirties,
pretty severe depression. I was trying to convince him to try medication, and he was like, ‘Yeah, but won’t that affect my libido?’ Uh,
you already said your libido is nonexistent.” There’s a tendency to
think, “‘I don’t want to be a slave to medication.’ People kind of selfsabotage sometimes.”
For all his reluctance to put his trust in conventional anti­
depressants, Patrick’s need for amelioration led him to Peru for an
ayahuasca retreat.
The plant-derived psychedelic drug has become trendy among
the wealthy in search of a wellness fix. In elaborate ceremonies,
shamans combine leaves from Psychotria viridis with vines from
Banisteriopsis caapi—mixing serotonin-targeting hallucinogen
N,N-dimethyltryptamine with harmala alkaloids that act as monoamine oxidase inhibitors.9 The same kind of thing, in other words,
that I spent years trying, but with an organic substance of uncertain potency and purity consumed in an uncontrolled environment
without close medical supervision.

Trust Issues

295

“I started reading on the internet about it. . . . It was all success
stories. I was like, ‘Wow. This is the real deal.’”
So he went for it. Booked a retreat at a place in the mountains that
got rave reviews online. Sat with fellow acolytes in a circle in a yurt,
on a mat with a vomit bucket beside him. Drank the psychedelic
brew. Results were not as advertised.
“It was a disaster. A complete disaster,” he says. “The first time
was pretty bad but the second time was a nightmare. I don’t even
know where to start.” He recalls gory imagery, the horrifying feeling
he was about to strangle someone to death. He thought, “I’m going
to be in a Peruvian mental asylum for the rest of my life.” For the first
time in all his years of melancholic fog, Patrick says, he felt suicidal.
Even back in Canada, he was in rough shape. “Not so much flashbacks as just not being able to handle having really horrible thoughts,
not being able to handle life, seeing it as kind of meaningless.”
His online search for solutions then led him to ketamine. The
party drug was making a name for itself as a potential panacea for
treatment-resistant depression. Patrick went to New York to a clinic
where an anesthesiologist administered ketamine intravenously offlabel, for a fee.
This cross-border, self-funded test of a relatively unproven treatment turned out better than the last: Before the hour-long intravenous drip was even complete, Patrick sat and watched the liquid
disappear into his arm and felt . . . better. “My thinking got really
rational all of a sudden. Problems that had seemed totally insurmountable suddenly became so easy to overcome.”
He felt, briefly, like the conductor of his own brain.
“I didn’t hallucinate or anything, but I had this kind of idea that
I was in my head and everything was spinning like crazy and I was
like, ‘Augh, it’s really crazy here. Just calm down.’ And the spinning
got slower and slower and then it was stable. Calm and optimistic.
Secure. Social interaction suddenly was very, very easy. Whereas
previously it had been incredibly difficult. I could walk into a coffee
shop and talk to a barista.”

296

Anna Mehler Paperny

Patrick got three $400 injections over the course of a week before
heading back home to Toronto. “I started dating a lot. It’s always
been something I avoided. You feel like you’re the worst person: Why
would anyone want to date me? But I was dating up a storm. It was
really great.” But the awesomeness wore off gradually; within two
months, “I felt like crap again, basically.”
He tried to find a Toronto doctor who’d give him ketamine and
restore that magic feeling. Easier said than done. “People are pretty
conservative here. Especially with mental health, people have a hard
time. You don’t have a bone sticking out of your leg,” so there’s less
a sense of try-anything urgency. Most places he asked, he didn’t get
past the receptionist. “I mostly just got laughed at. Like, are you
crazy? Prescribe ketamine?”
Eventually, he was referred to a Toronto doctor who’d been running trials on ketamine but had since switched to repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). He joined the trial; it didn’t work.
He recalls a mechanical arm and a large disc against his head, and a
painful sensation “like someone had a fishhook through your head.”
But he didn’t give up. He got a new doctor. Hearing him describe
this individual after his litany of less-than-stellar treatment felt like
watching two figures run in slow motion toward each other through
a field of wildflowers.
“She was awesome. . . . She was just super compassionate. A good
listener.”
To be clear, this was also the first Canadian doctor who agreed to
prescribe him ketamine; people tend to like clinicians who give them
what they want. But it still floors me that this dude, after eighteen years
of severe depression and a deep distrust of the medical field, waxes
lyrical over the prospect of an empathic physician. What a concept!
Now Patrick was getting intranasal ketamine—syringe-type vials
with misters attached that he’d spray up his nose once every two or
three days. He’d pick up a month or two or three from the one pharmacist in the city that dispensed take-home ketamine (this is not,
incidentally, something even the boldest ketamine boosters I spoke

Trust Issues

297

with would recommend you try). “The weirdest part was being high
on ketamine every three nights,” Patrick says. “It was kind of fun.
Especially at first. Just to be able to legally do that is pretty nice.”
But the antidepressant effect wasn’t there. He got high but
remained hopeless. And he was developing worrying signs of
dependence—feeling like he needed more, getting antsy as time
ticked toward his next dose even as he felt it was now making him
physically ill.
Even then he was resistant to traditional antidepressants. “She
kept suggesting I try medication again, and I was really stubborn
about it.” He avoided them for the same reasons he’d avoided them
for years—fear of becoming dependent, of being changed in some
fundamental way. “I’d just heard about bad reactions. I was very
worried about anything that would change my brain chemistry.”
Yes, someone who tried to treat his depression with ayahuasca
and ketamine, who experimented with LSD in his early twenties,
was so fearful of antidepressants’ effects on his brain chemistry that
he kept refusing to try them even at the urging of the first doctor
he’d ever truly trusted. This is not unusual: THis is what society
thinks of psychiatry and pharmacotherapy. I know plenty of people
who’d sooner take mind-altering recreational drugs than anything
that operates on those same pathways but comes from a prescription
pad and a pharmacy. This trust crisis kills people. Or it destroys their
lives when they don’t get effective treatment.
“So it took a lot of convincing. [My doctor] just kept bringing it
up. She’s really great . . . the best person. She just kept subtly implying, maybe it’s time to give this up. Maybe we should try something
else. At some point I was like, yeah, this isn’t working. I’m just getting high.”
So he started on escitalopram, the run-of-the-mill selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor I’d tried following my first suicide
attempt. “And that actually started to work. Gradually, very slowly,
as months went by. . . . And I gradually started to kind of turn my
life around.” He went back to school. Studied web design. Got a

298

Anna Mehler Paperny

job he genuinely enjoyed. Started meditating on the subway. “It’s
relaxing, and it kind of organizes your thoughts more. . . . It’s like
creating your own safe zone in your head. A little bit of distance
from what’s going on.”
Dating is still tough. Self-esteem is still an issue. But “relatively
speaking, I’m doing great compared to where I was before.”
I’m not the hopey-changey type. But hearing this inspires both a
vicarious, celebratory joy and a murderous envy.
I’ll have what he’s having.

28
First Person Afterword
The worst moment of this chasing was with a woman I met for an
interview at a Tim Hortons in Toronto. I arrived late, asked what
I could get her. She had the world’s most convoluted request: a small
black coffee filled all the way up, with an extra cup, and two milks,
and a cup of ice water, and a toasted multigrain bun with light cream
cheese on the side and cucumber on the side. So I did. But I also,
idiot, offered to get her something more—a proper sandwich—so
she asked for Tuscan chicken on a bun but they only had chipotle
chicken in a wrap so I got the wrap and an extra bun and sat and
watched her meticulously deconstruct and reconstruct the food
and drink in front of her as I tried and failed to ask her questions.
She didn’t want to talk. Got upset when I asked anything personal
or painful, which was every single question: If she was hoping for
small talk and a coffee, she was sitting across from the wrong girl.
“Let’s just eat first, OK?” she suggested.
A woman who was a patient advocate-liaison affiliated with the
Center for Addiction and Mental Health had put me in touch with
her as someone who could talk to me about falling through the
chasms in the health system. As she reconstructed her wrap, she
asked me about myself, my job, my reasons for writing this book. The
first time she asked I said something about the gap in depression discourse, the need for a clear-eyed, critical but measured examination

302

Anna Mehler Paperny

of what we know and don’t know and the ways we fail to use the
already inadequate resources we have to treat people who need help
now, not when we come up with something better. But the second
time she asked I mentioned my own experience and she fixated on
the first suicide attempt and my time in the psych ward. “But why
did you try to kill yourself? What was going on in your life? What
happened in your childhood?” She decided I must be bipolar, because
“I can see you’re manic. You’re all hyped up. And I know these things.
You laugh, but I know.” She decided writing this book was a terrible
idea—“You aren’t well. And asking questions like this, you’re going
to trigger other people”—and that, moreover, I should march myself
into a hospital right away because I needed to be committed, maybe
for a while. She was in rough shape, struggling with more than just
her mind: She was painfully thin—crepe skin stretched over spindly bones as she picked at her food. She’d spent years in and out of
inpatient anorexia treatment, being force-fed daily. She said she now
had an obstructed colon that prevented her from eating. But her ability to demolish me was masterful. She expertly pinpointed every
agonizing weakness in my self-view, every self-doubt that kept me
awake at night and paralyzed me in the morning, and prodded each
one of them to the point of incapacitation. Finally, an hour and an
eternity after I’d sat down, it was almost over. She asked me to walk
her to her appointment and then help her find her psychiatrist’s
office. I stumbled away drunk on self-loathing. I felt crazy and stupid
and liable to harm others, driving them, through my clumsy insensitive privacy invasions, to kill themselves. And that’s the greatest
fear, right? That disclosure will turn against you. That my literary
exercise could be responsible, even indirectly, for the anguish or,
god forbid, suicide deaths of other human beings.
I needed to talk to Andrew Solomon about how he does it. And
why he decided to tell everyone about all this awful personal stuff in
his world-shifting book The Noonday Demon. He was kind enough
not only to respond but also to invite me over for a chat at his beautiful house in lower Manhattan. I brought fresh croissants because I

First Person Afterword

303

know you can’t show up at someone’s house empty-handed but then
was so agog at his study I left them in their buttery paper bag by my
plush chair while we talked and I tried not to ogle the wall-to-wall
books too obviously or enviously. He spoke slowly, thoughtfully, as
though taking a topic he knew backward and looking at it anew.
“I think there’s a kind of social responsibility to being open and
public insofar as you are able to be, and different people are able to
be to different degrees. I live in a city, occupy a context and work in
a field where I wasn’t going to lose a lot of credit because I had been
depressed. So I felt like I had less to lose than other people would. If
I weren’t going to talk about it, then who would?” 1
He’d also already emerged from one closet and wasn’t prepared
to spend his life sequestered in another. “I felt that, as a gay person, I
had lived a life for quite a while in which I had a secret, and some
people knew and other people didn’t know, and I’d finally come out
of the closet. . . . I had decided I wanted never to have a secret again
where I had to wonder, ‘Do those people know that those people have
told those people?’ And I think that, a lot of the time, people who are
depressed devote so much energy to secrecy that could be better
devoted to getting better.”
Truth. The relief I feel from being able to tell people—or even
from not having to hide how I’m doing or make up alternative reasons for psychiatric appointments or drugs or impossible mornings—draws me almost as powerfully as the self-destructive fear
that disclosure will mean recrimination, will shaft opportunity or
connection or prompt polite insidious shunning at best. It’s painful.
I live in fear I’ll regret it. But, often, it’s too important not to.
“Telling the whole world can be a stressful operation, and I’m not
necessarily recommending it for everyone,” he says. “It seems to have
worked out reasonably well for me to do so.” The response he got has
been overwhelming. He figures he gets twenty, thirty emails a week
from people who’ve read his book and want to talk to him about their
depression, about their child’s or spouse’s or sibling’s. Seeking help
or commiseration: Does he know a good psychiatrist in their small

304

Anna Mehler Paperny

hometown? Can he tell them what drugs might work? Sharing their
own stories. “I give them advice within the limits of my ability to
give advice. . . . I don’t want anyone who feels abandoned by and disconnected from the world to get another experience of abandonment
from me. So even when they’re people who don’t particularly stir my
sympathies, I always try to deal with them as kindly as I can and to
say as much as I can about helping them.”
He tells me that today his bottom-feeder psycho-emotional lows
aren’t as severe as they once were. His husband and two young kids
and their Manhattan house help act as ballast for a forward-moving
existence. “I have a much more solid life than I did when [the depressive demons] first came. But, yes. It rears up. And every time it does,
it’s shocking all over again. I mean, I wrote a whole book about this.
I have to give public lectures about it. And I’m still overwhelmed by
how painful it is when it comes back again.”
It’s been almost eight years since I first tried to kill myself and
more than four years since I first started poking at the idea of writing a book about this basket-case condition, and there are days I
wake up and any possibility of improvement, any chance that I
could ever get better, is drowned in the undertow of despair. But
not every day is like that. Most days I make it into the newsroom at
Reuters, where I work. Most days I work, and it feels good—like I’m
building ground beneath my feet even as I struggle to keep from
plummeting. I couldn’t tell you if I’m any better off than I was the
September of my first suicide attempt. I know I’ve gone through
periods, some quite recent, where I was worse. But work on this
project gave me something to cling to and build on. It was validating. Almost every interview I did reinforced that this shit sandwich
of an illness is genuine and genuinely awful and affects many, many
more people than me. Those were days that made it seem worth
plugging away.
∙∙∙

First Person Afterword

305

One of the dangers of recognizing that your depression and its
dreary behavioral accoutrements constitute an extrinsic pathology
rather than intrinsic failure is that, in trying to disentangle what’s
actually you from what’s your soul-destroying disorder, it’s tempting to tell yourself that everything you dislike about yourself is due
to depression. It’s tempting to tell myself I’ll get completely better
and will be fantastic and personable and accomplished and attractive. And I know that’s not how it works. Even if treatment can
alleviate the psychomotor retardation that keeps me bedridden,
apartment-ridden and slow, I’m not going to magically run marathons. Even if it no longer required wrenching fortitude just to get
out of bed and out the door in the morning, I know I’d still have to
set multiple alarms and reminders for myself if I’m ever going to be
on time. Even if I can someday countenance group social inter­actions
without dread filling my chest like thick cold smoke, I’m not going
to be the bubbly life of the party. I’ll probably never get rid of selfloathing and self-doubt; but I can try to neutralize their effects.
Brain-stimulating, mind-mapping Helen Mayberg of Mount
Sinai’s Center for Advanced Circuit Therapeutics sees that. “There
are people who think a stimulator [implanted in their brain] is going
to give them a life transplant. It doesn’t. It takes away depression. So
what is it that you imagine of yourself if you weren’t depressed? Some
people have realistic expectations of what that means. If you haven’t
worked in five years, you’re not going to be CEO of the company that
you used to work in the mailroom for. So who do you think you are
as you emerge from depression?” 2
That question can horrify. There are days when I can’t conceptualize a self I would want to remain alive to be. Other days I can
imagine that person but can’t bear the trek it would take to become
her. Other days, the trek seems doable.

This is not a triumphant book. No one finds themselves; no one
is saved, although some remarkable people do incredible things.

30 6

Anna Mehler Paperny

There is no happy ending. It’s an uncomfortably personal exploration of a sickeningly common illness no one likes talking about, one
that remains undertreated and poorly treated and grossly inequitably treated in part because of our own squeamishness in confronting it or our own denial of its existence as an illness and the
destruction it wreaks when left to its own devices.
It doesn’t have to be this way. There are pathways to compassionate, equitable, informed care for an illness that pummels too many
for too long without respite. But we need to act like this is something
we care about.
Again and again and again and again, when an interview went
from need for reform to methods of reform and then to the public
pressure and political will needed to achieve reform, I asked how to
muster the latter, and clinicians and researchers threw it back at me:
“That’s your job.”
I’m torn on that front. I’m a journalist, not an advocate or an activist. But I can inform, I can document, I can explore, I can provoke, I
can punch in the face with words. The topic of depression in the context of my writing this book is complicated by my conflict of interest: I want this stuff to change; I want to change discourse and
attitudes and, as a result, alter outcomes. I want someone to come
up with new medical interventions that work magic. This disorder
that I have corrodes the sense of self and destroys the desire to live;
hope in recovery, of getting “better,” diminishes to nothing, a sliver
of sandcastle in a rising tide. But if I kill myself, if I don’t achieve and
maintain remission, it won’t be because the system that fails millions
daily has failed me: THe system’s treated me just fine; it just isn’t good
enough yet.
Our failure to address this illness is a systemic fuckup with an enormous impact; it compounds marginalizations of race and income, and
harms most those least able to advocate for themselves. It’s inadequately
explored and conversation on the subject, as with so many systemic
fuckups, is too often dominated by platitudes and siloed extremes.
For a society that’s gone so far in so many civil and scientific

First Person Afterword

307

arenas, there are some things we still do astonishingly badly. Treating
the most debilitating chronic illness out there is one of them.
So let’s fix this, goddammit, and move on to bitching about something else.

Resources and Further Reading
For immediate help:
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline 1-800-273-8255
TTY for the Hearing & Speech Impaired: 1-800-799-4889
suicidepreventionlifeline.org

For suicide survivor support:
Alliance of Hope
https://allianceofhope.org/
To learn more about suicide, mental illness, and mental health care options:
• samhsa.gov (US Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration)
• suicidology.org (American Association of Suicidology)
• afsp.org (American Foundation for Suicide Prevention)
• nimh.nih.gov (The National Institute of Mental Health)
• ihs.gov/suicideprevention (Indian Health Service)
• save.org (Suicide Awareness Voices of Education)

National helplines
Veterans Crisis Line (800) 273-8255 (Press 1 or text 838255)
veteranscrisisline.net
The Trevor Project (for LGBTQ youth) 1-866-488-7386
thetrevorproject.org
The Jed Foundation (for teens and young adults) 1-800-273-8255
jedfoundation.org
Trans Lifeline 1-877-565-8860
translifeline.org
Crisis Text Line (text message services for people in crisis)
Text HOME to 74174
crisistextline.org
Teen Line 310-855-4673 or text TEEN to 839863
teenlineonline.org

ULifeline (for college students) 1-800-273-8255
ulifeline.org
International Bipolar Foundation 1-800-784-2433
ibpf.org/suicide-hotline
Grad Resources (for graduate school students) 1-877-472-3457
gradresources.org
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA) 1-800-662-4357
samhsa.gov/find-help/national-helpline

Further Reading:
Willow Weep for Me: A Black Woman’s Journey through Depression by
Meri Nana-Ama Danquah
Freshwater by Akwaeke Emezi
Faces in the Water by Janet Frame
To the River: Losing My Brother by Don Gillmor
American Melancholy: Constructions of Depression in the Twentieth
Century by Laura D. Hirshbein
One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest by Ken Kesey
My Lovely Wife in the Psych Ward by Mark Lukach
Committed: The Battle Over Involuntary Psychiatric Care by Dinah
Miller and Annette Hanson
The Bell Jar by Sylvia Plath
Madness in Civilization: A Cultural History of Insanity by Andrew Scull
The Noonday Demon: An Atlas of Depression by Andrew Solomon
Darkness Visible: A Memoir of Madness by William Styron
All My Puny Sorrows by Miriam Toews
American Psychosis: How the Federal Government Destroyed the Mental
Illness Treatment System by E. Fuller Torrey
Prozac Nation: Young and Depressed in America by Elizabeth Wurtzel
The Neuroscientist Who Lost Her Mind: My Tale of Madness and
Recovery by Barbara Lipska and Elaine McArdle

Acknowledgments
A reporter’s only as good as her sources and here I’ve been exceptionally fortunate. I want to thank, sincerely and obstreperously, everyone who gave me their time, experience and expertise in my pursuit
of this book—everyone who talked to me, met with me, sent me
papers, showed me their brain banks, recalled for me the worst
moments of their lives. Thank you. You give me reasons to wake up
in the morning.
I want to thank my expert readers, geniuses in their fields who took
the time to read, comment, and give feedback on my manuscript. Irfan
Dhalla, Marcia Valenstein, Paul Kurdyak, Sarah Lisanby, Kwame
McKenzie, and Julie Cerel—you made this book so much better.
I owe an incalculable debt of gratitude to Louise Dennys, the
brilliant powerhouse who brought this beast into being.
To Rick Meier, a stalwart and one of the first to wrestle with this
creature, and Angelika Glover, a pro who gets it.
To the arts councils of Toronto, Ontario, and Canada, who taught
me humility by turning me down for every grant I applied for but
one, and to Denis De Klerck, who convinced Ontario to give me
$1,500. You were among the first to believe in this thing.
To José Silveira, who teaches me to make life worth living and
who, let’s face it, puts up with a lot.
To Omar El Akkad, the human being I want to be.
To Brendan Kennedy, who keeps saving my life.

Acknowledgments

311

To Richard Warnica, who makes me keep chasing.
To Allison Martell, who inspires me.
To Leslie Young, who keeps me grounded.
To Amran Abocar, who makes a day job possible.
To Jennifer Griffiths, a visual wizard.
To Heather Cromarty, a true ally.
And to Liana Willis and Hana El Niwairi, who helped make
this a reality.
To Gram, who was right all along, who made me a writer. And to
Grandma Ruthie, who shows me what strength is.
To my beloved baby siblings, Daniel and Juliet Paperny, my muses
and partners in crime. And to their partners, Lindsay Paperny and
Jaylen Gadhia, masters of fortitude. And to Zoe, my little rock star.
And, above all, to my parents, Audrey Mehler and David
Paperny, who support me when I need it most and want it least,
who teach me resilience through unconditional love and inappropriate jokes.
Thank you.

Notes
CHAPTER 1: CATACLYSM
1. Jayme Poisson and Curtis Rush, “Toronto Police Shoot and Kill Man with
Scissors Wearing Hospital Gown,” Toronto Star, February 3, 2012.
2. Tim Alamenciak and Hamida Ghafour, “Who Was Sammy Yatim?” Toronto
Star, August 24, 2013.
3. Richard Warnica, “The Life and Bloody Death of Andrew Loku,” National
Post, July 17, 2015.
4. Anna Mehler Paperny, “Ontario NDP Unveils Platform, Includes Corporate
Tax Hikes and Contingency Cushion,” The Globe and Mail, September 25, 2011.
CHAPTER 2: WHEN YOU TRY TO DIE AND DON’T
1. Ontario Mental Health Act, 1990, www.ontario.ca/laws/statute/90m07.
2. www.sse.gov.on.ca/mohltc/ppao/en/Pages/InfoGuides/2016_Form1.aspx.
3. https://www.sse.gov.on.ca/mohltc/ppao/en/Pages/InfoGuides/2016_
Involuntary_Patients.aspx.
4. Heather Stuart, “Violence and Mental Illness: An Overview,” World
Psychiatry, June 2003.
5. Omar El Akkad, “Steve Jobs: The Man Who Changed Your World,” The Globe
and Mail, October 5, 2011.
6. James A. Kruse, “Methanol and Ethylene Glycol Intoxication,” Critical Care
(2012).
CHAPTER 3: PSYCH-WARD SOJOURN
1. Ontario Consent and Capacity Board Annual Report, 2016/2017, www.
ccboard.on.ca/english/publications/documents/annualreport20162017.pdf.
2. Toronto Community Health Profiles, 2012–13 and 2013–14, www.toronto­
healthprofiles.ca/a_dataTables.php.

Notes

313

3. Tim Alamenciak and Timothy Appleby, “Charges Laid in Assaults on
Mentally Ill in Toronto’s Parkdale Neighborhood,” The Globe and Mail,
May 3, 2011.
4. Parkdale Neighborhood Land Trust, No Room for Unkept Promises: Parkdale
Rooming Houses Study, May 2017.
Almost 4,000 people apprehended under Ontario’s Mental Health Act
were dropped off at St. Joe’s between 2014 and 2017, 500 more than the
second-place hospital, CAMH. (Toronto Police Service statistics released
in January 2018, obtained through Access-to-Information request.)
5. City of Toronto, Social Housing Waiting List Reports, Q2, 2018.
6. Patricia O’Campo et al., “How did a Housing First intervention improve
health and social outcomes among homeless adults with mental illness
in Toronto? Two-year outcomes from a randomized trial,” BMJ Open
(September 2016).
CHAPTER 5: WHEN DIAGNOSIS MAKES YOU CRAZY
1. Patrick Barkham, “Green-Haired Turtle that Breathes through Its Genitals
Added to Endangered List,” The Guardian, April 11, 2018.
CHAPTER 7: KNOW THINE ENEMY
1. Madhukar Trivedi, interviewed by the author by phone, October 11, 2016.
2. Paul Kurdyak, interviewed by the author in Toronto, March 30, 2015.
3. Javed Alloo, interviewed by the author in Toronto, September 6, 2016.
4. Ishaq ibn Imran in Andrew Scull, Madness in Civilization (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2015), 56.
5. Andrew Solomon, The Noonday Demon: An Atlas of Depression (New York:
Scribner, 2001), 31–2.
6. Scull, Civilization, 92, 168.
7. National Institute of Mental Health, “Major Depression,” www.nimh.nih
.gov/health/statistics/major-depression.shtml.
8. Ronald C. Kessler et al., “Lifetime and 12-month Prevalence of DSM-III-R
Psychiatric Disorders in the United States,” Arch Gen Psychiatry (1994).
9. US Centers for Disease Control, “Selected prescription drug classes used
in the past 30 days, by sex and age: United States, selected years 1988–1994
through 2011–2014,” https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2016/080.pdf.
10. World Health Organization, Depression and Other Common Mental Disorders:
Global Health Estimates, 2017.
11. WHO, Depression, 2017.
12. Sarah Lisanby, interviewed by the author by phone, July 6, 2016.

314

Anna Mehler Paperny

13. Laura Hirshbein, American Melancholy: Constructions of Depression in the
Twentieth Century (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2009), 59.
CHAPTER 8: CHECKING BOXES
1. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5, “Major Depressive
Disorder” (Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
2. Benoit Mulsant, interviewed by the author by phone, April 23, 2015.
3. Scull, Civilization, 392.
4. Elliot Goldner, interviewed by the author by phone, March 20, 2015.
5. Allen Frances, “The New Crisis of Confidence in Psychiatric Diagnosis,”
Annals of Internal Medicine (August 6, 2013), http://annals.org/aim/article
/1722526/new-crisis-confidence-psychiatric-diagnosis.
6. Thomas Scull, Civilization, 408.
7. Tom Insel, interviewed by the author by phone, August 23, 2016.
CHAPTER 9: SUICIDE BLUES
1. Jane Pearson, interviewed by the author by phone, July 13, 2016.
2. Jan Neeleman, “Suicide as a Crime in the UK,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica
(1996).
3. Rae Spiwak et al., “Suicide Policy in Canada: Lessons from History,”
Canadian Journal of Public Health (2012).
4. Prakash Behere et al., “Decriminalization of Attempted Suicide Law:
Journey of Fifteen Decades,” Indian Journal of Psychiatry (2015).
5. Jose Manoel Bertolote and Alexandra Fleischman, “Suicide and Psychiatric
Diagnosis: A Worldwide Perspective,” World Psychiatry (October 2002).
6. Maria Oquendo, interviewed by the author by phone, July 13, 2017.
7. Tom Ellis, interviewed by the author by phone, July 26, 2016.
8. World Health Organization, “Suicide: Key Facts,” August 24, 2018,
www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/suicide.
9. Statistics Canada, table 13-10-0392-01, “Deaths and Age-Specific Mortality
Rates, by Selected Grouped Causes,” www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en
/tv.action?pid=1310039201.
10. You’re also more than 63 percent more likely to kill yourself than to die in a car
accident and 44 percent more likely to kill yourself than to die of prostate
cancer. Statistics Canada, Canadian Vital Statistics, Birth and Death Databases
and Appendix II of the publication “Mortality Summary List of Causes,” 2012,
www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/84f0209x/2009000/t023-eng.htm.
11. National Violent Death Reporting System, Office of Statistics and
Programming, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, CDC.
12. National Vital Statistics System, National Center for Health Statistics, CDC.
13. J. K. Canner et al., “Emergency Department Visits for Attempted Suicide and

Notes

315

Self Harm in the USA: 2006–2013,” Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences
(February 2018).
14. National Center for Health Statistics, “Suicide Mortality in the United
States, 1999–2017,” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, November
2018, https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db330.htm.
15. Sally C. Curtin, Margaret Warner, and Holly Hedegaard, “Increase in
Suicide in the United States, 1999–2014,” NCHS Data Brief No. 241,
April 2016, www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db241.htm.
16. Jane Pearson, interviewed by the author, July 13, 2016.
17. Sarah Lisanby, interviewed by the author, July 6, 2016.
18. Robin Skinner et al., “Suicide in Canada: Is Poisoning Misclassification
an Issue?” Canadian Journal of Psychiatry (July 2016).
19. Ian R. H. Rockett et al., “Suicide and Unintentional Poisoning Mortality
Trends in the United States, 1987–2006: Two Unrelated Phenomena?”
BMC Public Health (2010).
20. Ian R. H. Rockett et al., “Variable Classification of Drug-Intoxication Suicides
across US States: A Partial Artifact of Forensics?” PLOS One (August 2015).
21. Skinner et al., “Suicide in Canada.”
22. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “The Changing Profile of
Autopsied Deaths in the United States, 1972–2007,” NCHS Data Brief No. 67,
August 2011.
23. Rockett et al., “Suicide and Unintentional Poisoning Mortality.”
24. Ian Rockett, interviewed by the author by phone, August 2, 2016.
25. Rockett et al., “Unintentional Poisoning Mortality.”
26. Skinner et al., “Suicide in Canada.”
27. Rockett et al., “Unintentional Poisoning Mortality.”
28. Skinner et al., “Suicide in Canada.”
29. National Violent Death Reporting System, CDC.
30. Ian Rockett et al., “Race/Ethnicity and Potential Suicide Misclassification:
Window on a Minority Suicide Paradox?” BMC Psychiatry (2010).
31. Rockett et al., “Race/ethnicity and potential suicide misclassification.”
32. Rockett, interviewed by the author by phone, August 2, 2016.
33. Michael Peck, interviewed by the author by phone, August 18, 2016.
CHAPTER 11: A PILL-POPPING PARADE
1. Gil Tomer, “Prevailing Against Cost-Leader Competitors in the Pharmaceutical
Industry,” Journal of Generic Medicines 5, No. 4 (July 2008).
2. Haiden A. Huskamp, Alisa B. Busch, Marisa E. Domino, and Sharon-Lise
T. Normand, “Antidepressant Reformulations: Who Uses Them, and What
Are the Benefits?” Health Affairs 28, No. 3 (May/June 2009).

316

Anna Mehler Paperny

3. Jennifer Tryon and Nick Logan, “Antidepressant Wellbutrin Becomes ‘Poor
Man’s Cocaine’ on Toronto Streets,” Global News (September 18, 2013).
4. Jakob Nielsen, “Dysregulation of Renal Aquaporins and Epithelial Sodium
Channel in Lithium Induced Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus,” Seminars in
Nephrology (May 2008).
5. Ross J. Baldessarini and Leonardo Tondo, “Lithium in Psychiatry,” Revista
De Neuro-Psiquiatria (2013).
6. Martin Alda et al., “Lithium in the Treatment of Bipolar Disorder:
Pharmacology and Pharmacogenetics,” Molecular Psychiatry (2015).
7. Thomas E. Schlaepfer et al., “The Hidden Third: Improving Outcome in
Treatment-Resistant Depression,” Journal of Psychopharmacology (2012);
Laura Orsolini et al., “Atypical Antipsychotics in Major Depressive
Disorder,” Understanding Depression (2018).
8. Sven Ulrich, Roland Ricken, and Mazda Adli, “Tranylcypromine in Mind
(Part I): Review of Pharmacology,” European Neuropsychopharmacology
(April 2017).
9. Roland Ricken, Sven Ulrich, Peter Schlattman, and Mazda Adli,
“Tranylcypromine in Mind (Part II): Review of Clinical Pharmacology
and Meta-analysis of Controlled Studies in Depression,” European
Neuropsychopharmacology (April 2017).
10. Maurizio Fava and A. John Rush, “Current Status of Augmentation and
Combination Treatments for Major Depressive Disorder: A Literature
Review and a Proposal for a Novel Approach to Improve Practice,”
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics (2006).
11. Thomas J. Moore and Donald R. Mattison, “Adult Utilization of Psychiatric
Drugs and Differences by Sex, Age, and Race,” JAMA Internal Medicine
(December 2016).
12. Thomas Harr and Lars E. French, “Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis and StevensJohnson Syndrome,” Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases (2010).
13. Connie Sanchez, Karen E. Asin and Francesca Artigas, “Vortioxetine,
a Novel Antidepressant with Multimodal Activity: Review of Preclinical
and Clinical Data,” Pharmacology & Therapeutics (2014).
14. Richard A. Friedman, interviewed by the author by phone, October 19, 2016.
15. They were also more likely to be white or Hispanic and less likely to be black,
but that could be because of response rates or general likelihood of continued
participation: the population was overwhelmingly white all
the way through. A. John Rush et al., “Acute and Longer-Term Outcomes
in Depressed Outpatients Requiring One or Several Treatment Steps:
A STAR*D Report,” American Journal of Psychiatry (November 2006).

Notes

317

16. Madhukar Trivedi, interviewed by the author by phone, October 11, 2016.
17. Steven Hyman, interviewed by the author by phone, March 4, 2015.
18. Katelyn R. Keyloun et al., “Adherence and Persistence Across Antidepressant
Therapeutic Classes: A Retrospective Claims Analysis Among Insured US
Patients with Major Depressive Disorder (MDD),” CNS Drugs (April 2017).
19. Elisabeth Y. Bijlsma et al., “Sexual Side Effects of Serotonergic
Antidepressants: Mediated by Inhibition of Serotonin on Central Dopamine
Release?” Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior (October 2013).
20. Arif Khan and Walter Brown, “Antidepressants Versus Placebo in Major
Depression: An Overview,” World Psychiatry (2015).
21. Benoit Mulsant, “Is There a Role for Antidepressant and Antipsychotic
Pharmacogenetics in Clinical Practice in 2014?” Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry (February 2014).
CHAPTER 12: GOOD NOTICING!
1. Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, “History of Cognitive
Behavior Therapy,” https://beckinstitute.org/about-beck/our-history
/history-of-cognitive-therapy/.
2. Steven Hollon et al., “Effect of Cognitive Therapy with Antidepressant
Medications vs. Antidepressants Alone on the Rate of Recovery in Major
Depressive Disorder,” JAMA Psychiatry (2014).
3. Christiane Steinert et al., “Relapse Rates after Psychotherapy for Depression—
Stable Long-term Effects? A Meta-analysis,” Journal of Affective Disorders (2014).
4. Mark Olfson and Steven Marcus, “National Patterns in Antidepressant
Medication Treatment,” JAMA Psychiatry (August 2009).
5. Dennis Greenberger and Christine A. Padesky, authors of the clinically
sound, largely helpful bestselling work, Mind Over Mood: Change How You
Feel by Changing the Way You Think (New York: Guilford Publications, 1995).
6. Statutory Regulation in Canada. Canadian Counselling and Psychotherapy
Association, 2016.
7. There are guidelines out there: Health Quality Ontario has found evidence for
CBT, interpersonal therapy and supportive therapy for depression and anxiety,
and recommends publicly covering their provision by non-physicians. (At the
time of this writing, they are not.) Health Quality Ontario, “Psychotherapy for
Major Depressive Disorder and Generalized Anxiety Disorder: A Health
Technology Assessment” and “Psychotherapy for Major Depressive Disorder
and Generalized Anxiety Disorder: OHTAC Recommendation,” 2017. https://
www.hqontario.ca/Portals/0/documents/evidence/reports/htapsychotherapy-1711.pdf and https://www.hqontario.ca/Portals/0/documents/

318

Anna Mehler Paperny

evidence/reports/ohtac-recommendations-psychotherapy-1711-en.pdf.
8. Michael Schoenbaum, interviewed by the author by phone, July 22, 2016.
CHAPTER 13: ZAPPING, SHOCKING, AND BURNING YOUR
BRAIN INTO SUBMISSION
1. Jeff Daskalakis, interviewed by the author in Toronto, August 9, 2016.
2. Jonathan Downar, Daniel M. Blumberger, and Zafiris J. Daskalakis,
“Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation: an emerging treatment
for medication-resistant depression,” CMAJ (November 2016).
3. Charles Kellner, interviewed by the author by phone, November 10, 2016.
4. Georgios Petrides et al., “ECT Remission Rates in Psychotic Versus
Nonpsychotic Depressed Patients: A Report from CORE,” The Journal
of ECT (2001); Gerard Gagne et al., “Efficacy of Continuation ECT and
Antidepressant Drugs Compared to Long-Term Antidepressants Alone
in Depressed Patients,” American Journal of Psychiatry (2000).
5. Thomas Insel, interviewed by the author, March 25, 2015.
6. Sarah Lisanby, “Facebook Q&A on Electroconvulsive Therapy,” March 17, 2016.
7. Charles Kellner et al., “Continuation Electroconvulsive Therapy vs.
Pharmacotherapy for Relapse Prevention in Major Depression: A Multisite
Study from the Consortium for Research in Electroconvulsive Therapy
(CORE),” Archives of General Psychiatry (2006).
8. Darin Dougherty, interviewed by the author by phone, October 13, 2016.
9. H. Thomas Ballantyne Jr. et al., “Treatment of Psychiatric Illness by
Stereotactic Cingulotomy,” Biological Psychiatry (July 1987).
10. Clemens Janssen et al., “Whole-Body Hyperthermia for the Treatment of Major
Depressive Disorder: A Randomized Clinical Trial,” JAMA Psychiatry (2016).
CHAPTER 14: BRAINIACS
1. Barbara Lipska, interviewed by the author in Bethesda, MD, July 1, 2016.
2. Barbara Lipska and Elaine McArdle, The Neuroscientist Who Lost Her Mind: My
Tale of Madness and Recovery (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2018).
3. Jonathan Sirovatka, interviewed by the author in Bethesda, MD, July 1, 2016.
4. Melanie Bose, interviewed by the author in Bethesda, MD, July 1, 2016.
5. Luke Dittrich, Patient H. M.: A Story of Memory, Madness, and Family Secrets
(New York: Random House, 2016).
6. Kasey N. David et al., “GAD2 Alternative Transcripts in the Human
Prefrontal Cortex, and in Schizophrenia and Affective Disorders,” PlosONE
(February 2016).
7. Maree Webster, interviewed by the author in Rockville, MD, June 28, 2016.
8. Gustavo Turecki, interviewed by the author in Montreal, August 8, 2016.

Notes

319

CHAPTER 15: A DRY PHARMA PIPELINE
1. Francisco López-Muñoz and Cecilio Alamo, “Monoaminergic
Neurotransmission: The History of the Discovery of Antidepressants from
1950s Until Today,” Current Pharmaceutical Design 15, No. 14 (2009).
2. Steven Hyman, interviewed by the author by phone, March 4, 2015.
3. James W. Murrough and Dennis S. Charney, “Is There Anything Really
Novel on the Antidepressant Horizon?” Current Psychiatry Reports
(December 2012).
4. “Guideline on clinical investigation of medicinal products in the treatment
of depression,” European Medicines Agency, 2013; Corrado Barbui and Irene
Bighelli, “A New Approach to Psychiatric Drug Approval in Europe,” PLOS
Medicine (October 2013).
5. Steven Hyman, interviewed by the author, March 4, 2015.
6. Alison Abbott, “Novartis to Shut Brain Research Facility,” Nature,
December 6, 2011, www.nature.com/news/novartis-to-shut-brainresearch-facility-1.9547?nc=1344043518270.
7. Gregers Wegener and Dan Rujescu, “The Current Development of
CNS Drug Research,” International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology
(August 2013).
8. Richard A. Friedman, interviewed by the author by phone, October 19, 2016.
9. Amy E. Sousa, email to the author, January 13, 2017.
10. Steven Danehey, email to the author, November 1, 2016.
11. Mai Tran, email to the author, September 26, 2016.
12. Pamela L. Eisele, email to the author, October 20, 2016.
13. Mark Marmur, email to the author, January 13, 2017.
14. Hyman, interviewed by the author, March 4, 2015.
15. Kenneth Kaitin, interviewed by the author, October 24, 2016.
16. Thomas R. Insel, “The Anatomy of NIMH Funding,” www.nimh.nih.gov
/funding/funding-strategy-for-research-grants/the-anatomy-of-nimhfunding.shtml.
17. Zul Merali, Keith Gibbs and Keith Busby, “Mental-Health Research Needs
More than Private Donations,” The Globe and Mail (January 29, 2018).
18. Braincanada.ca, accessed Jan. 27, 2018.
CHAPTER 16: OLD ILLNESS, NEW TRICKS—THE ELECTRODE
IN YOUR BRAIN
1. Helen Mayberg, interviewed by the author by phone, August 4, 2016.
2. Craig M. Bennett, Abigail A. Baird, Michael B. Miller, and George L.
Wolford, “Neural Correlates of Interspecies Perspective Taking in the
Post-Mortem Atlantic Salmon: An Argument for Multiple Comparisons

320

Anna Mehler Paperny

Correction,” NeuroImage (July 2009).
3. Deanna Cole-Benjamin, interviewed by the author in Kingston, ON,
November 23, 2016.
4. Takashi Morishita et al., “Deep Brain Stimulation for Treatment-Resistant
Depression: Systematic Review of Clinical Outcomes,” Neurotherapeutics
(2014).
5. Justin D. Paquette, email to the author, June 14, 2018.
6. Eric Epperson, email to the author, September 30, 2016.
7. Helen Mayberg, email to the author, January 15, 2019.
8. Darin Dougherty, interviewed by the author by phone, April 20, 2017.
CHAPTER 17: OLD ILLNESS, NEW TRICKS— FROM
PSYCHEDELICS TO SMARTPHONES
1. Gerard Sanacora, interviewed by the author in New Haven, June 27, 2016.
2. Benedict Carey, “Fast-Acting Depression Drug, Newly Approved, Could
Help Millions,” New York Times, March 5, 2019.
3. Husseini Manji, interviewed by the author by phone, July 7, 2016.
4. Ella Daly et al., “Efficacy and Safety of Intranasal Esketamine Adjunctive
to Oral Antidepressant Therapy in Treatment-Resistant Depression:
A Randomized Clinical Trial,” JAMA Psychiatry (February 2018).
5. Darrick May, interviewed by the author by phone, January 10, 2017.
6. Madhukar Trivedi, interviewed by the author by phone, October 11, 2016.
7. Ken Kaitin, interviewed by the author by phone, October 24, 2016.
8. David Dobbs, “The Smartphone Psychiatrist,” The Atlantic (July/August 2017).
9. Thomas Insel, interviewed by the author by phone, August 23, 2016.
10. https://mindstronghealth.com/science/ accessed January 16, 2018.
11. John Torous and Laura Weiss Roberts, “Needed Innovation in Digital Health
and Smartphone Applications for Mental Health,” JAMA Psychiatry (May 2017).
12. David Bakker, Nikolaos Kazantzis, Debra Rickwood, and Nikki Rickard,
“Mental Health Smartphone Apps: Review and Evidence-Based
Recommendations for Future Developments,” JMIR Mental Health (2016).
13. Torous and Weiss Roberts, “Needed Innovation in Digital Health.”
14. Eric Finzi, interviewed by the author by phone, October 26, 2016.
15. A trial Finzi conducted with Norman Rosenthal, published in 2014, randomized
85 people with major depressive disorder to receive either botulism toxin
(onabotulinumtoxinA) or saline injected into their frown muscles. Six weeks
after treatment, the study found, subjects’ scores on the Montgomery Asberg
Depression Rating Scale dropped an average of 47 percent for people who got the
botulism and 7 percent for the saline group. Eric Finzi and Norman Rosenthal,

Notes

321

“Treatment of Depression with OnabotulinumtoxinA: A Randomized, DoubleBlind, Placebo Controlled Trial,” Journal of Psychiatric Research (2014). See also
Andreas Hennenlotter et al., “The Link Between Facial Feedback and Neural
Activity within Central Circuitries of Emotion—New Insights from Botulinum
Toxin—Induced Denervation of Frown Muscles,” Cerebral Cortex (2009); M.
Justin Kim et al., “Botulinum Toxin-Induced Facial Muscle Paralysis Affects
Amygdala Responses to the Perception of Emotional Expressions: Preliminary
Findings from an A-B-A Design,” Biology of Mood and Anxiety Disorders (2014).
16. Sarah Lisanby, interviewed by the author by phone, January 26, 2017.
CHAPTER 18: STIGMA AND RELATED BULLSHIT
1. https://letstalk.bell.ca/en/.
2. Donna Ferguson in Anna Mehler Paperny, “Mental Illness: How Do I Find
Treatment, and What Happens Next?” Globalnews.ca, October 16, 2014.
3. Mary, interviewed by the author in Toronto, August 20, 2016.
4. Claude Di Stasio, interview with the author by phone, August 17, 2016.
5. Karen Cutler, interview with the author by phone, September 22, 2016.
6. Deanna Cole-Benjamin, interview with the author in Kingston, ON,
November 23, 2016.
7. Michelle Yan, interviewed by the author in Toronto, December 2, 2016.
8. Hirshbein, Melancholy.
9. Gary Newman, text message to the author, October 11, 2017.
10. Lisa, interviewed by the author by phone, August 11, 2016.
CHAPTER 19: THROUGH THE CRACKS
1. Findings and recommendations as a result of the Coroner’s Inquest Pursuant
to Section 38 of the Coroners Act, [SBC 2007] C 15, into the death of
Geisheimer, Brian David; Abdi, Sebastien Pavit; Charles, Sarah Louise, 2015.
2. Alexis Kerr, General Counsel for Fraser Health Authority, “Re: Response to
recommendations regarding the Coroner’s Inquest into the deaths of: Brian
Geisheimer; Sarah Charles; and Sebastian Abdi,” September 18, 2018.
3. Paul Kurdyak, interviewed by the author in Toronto, March 25, 2015.
4. Melanie Bose, interviewed by the author in Bethesda, MD, July 1, 2016.
5. Brian K. Ahmedani et al., “Health Care Contacts in the Year before Suicide
Death,” Society of General Internal Medicine (2014).
6. Brian Ahmedani, interviewed by the author by phone, August 1, 2016.
7. zerosuicide.sprc.org.
8. Cathrine Frank, interviewed by the author by phone, November 26, 2018.
9. Jane Pearson, interviewed by the author by phone, July 13, 2016.

322

Anna Mehler Paperny

10. Mark Olfson, interviewed by the author by phone, September 16, 2016.
11. Javed Alloo, interviewed by the author in Toronto, September 7, 2016.
CHAPTER 20: MENTAL HEALTH IS FOR RICH PEOPLE
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Early Release of Estimates
from the National Health Interview Survey,” January–March 2016;
“Pharmacare Now: Prescription Medicine Coverage for All Canadians,”
Report of the Standing Committee on Health, April 2018.
2. Steven C. Marcus, Jeffrey A. Bridge, and Mark Olfson, “Payment Source
and Emergency Management of Deliberate Self-Harm,” American Journal
of Public Health 102, No. 6 (June 2012).
3. Mark Olfson, interviewed by the author by phone, September 16, 2016.
4. Tara Bishop et al., “Acceptance of Insurance by Psychiatrists and the
Implications for Access to Mental Health Care,” JAMA Psychiatry
(February 2014).
5. Maria Oquendo, interviewed by the author by phone, July 13, 2017.
6. Tim Bruckner, interviewed by the author in Irvine, CA, July 11, 2016.
7. Joseph H. Puyat, Arminee Kazanjian, Elliot M. Goldner and Hubert Wong,
“How Often Do Individuals with Major Depression Receive Minimally
Adequate Treatment? A Population-Based, Data Linkage Study,” The
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry (2016).
8. Paul Kurdyak et al., “Universal Coverage without Universal Access: A Study
of Psychiatrist Supply and Practice Patterns in Ontario,” Open Medicine
(2014).
9. Paul Kurdyak, interviewed by the author, March 25, 2015.
10. Michael Schoenbaum, interviewed by the author by phone, September 19, 2016.
11. Paul Kurdyak and Sanjeev Sockalingam, “How Canada Fails People with
Mental Illness,” Ottawa Citizen (January 22, 2015).
CHAPTER 21: TRYING TO HEAL THE LITTLEST MINDS
1. Laura Kann et al., “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States, 2015,”
Surveillance Summaries, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
June 10, 2016.
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Web-based Injury Statistics
Query and Reporting System (WISQARS).
3. Arielle Sheftall, interviewed by the author by phone, March 27, 2018.
4. Madelyn Gould, interviewed by the author by phone, March 27, 2018.
5. Jane Pearson, interviewed by the author by phone, July 13, 2016.
6. US Department of Health and Human Services, “Sexual Identity, Sex of
Sexual Contacts, and Health-Related Behaviors among Students in Grades

Notes

323

9–12—United States and Selected Sites, 2015,” Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, August 12, 2016.
7. Ann Haas et al., “Suicide and Suicide Risk in Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender Populations: Review and Recommendations,” Journal of
Homosexuality (January 2011).
8. Haas et al., “Suicide and Suicide Risk.”
9. Ann Haas, interviewed by the author by phone, May 18, 2018.
10. Mark L. Hatzenbuehler, Katherine M. Keyes, and Deborah S. Hasin, “StateLevel Policies and Psychiatric Morbidity in Lesbian, Gay and Bisexual
Populations,” American Journal of Public Health (December 2009).
11. Mark L. Hatzenbeuhler, Katie A. McLaughlin, Katherine M. Keyes and
Deborah S. Hasin, “The Impact of Institutional Discrimination on
Psychiatric Disorders in Lesbian, Gay and Bisexual Populations: A
Prospective Study,” American Journal of Public Health (March 2010).
12. Ilan H. Meyer, Jessica Dietrich, and Sharon Schwartz, “Lifetime Prevalence
of Mental Disorders and Suicide Attempts in Diverse Lesbian, Gay, and
Bisexual Populations,” American Journal of Public Health (June 2008).
13. Tarek A. Hammad, “Relationship between Psychotropic Drugs and Pediatric
Suicidality,” Food and Drug Administration, 2004.
14. Gardiner Harris, “FDA Links Drugs to Being Suicidal,” The New York Times
(September 14, 2004).
15. Christine Y. Lu et al., “Changes in Antidepressant Use by Young People
and Suicidal Behavior after FDA Warnings and Media Coverage: QuasiExperimental Study,” The BMJ (June 2014); Anne M. Libby, Heather D.
Orton, and Robert J. Valuck, “Persisting Decline in Depression Treatment
after FDA Warnings,” JAMA Psychiatry (June 2009).
16. “We cannot ignore the weight of these epidemiologic data or the very real
possibility that the FDA advisory has unintentionally discouraged depressed
patients from seeking treatment and doctors from prescribing antidepressants,”
psychiatrist Richard A. Friedman wrote, “Antidepressants’ Black-Box
Warning—10 Years Later,” New England Journal of Medicine (October 2014).
17. Betsy Kennard, interviewed by the author by phone, March 13, 2018.
18. Marcella, interviewed by the author by phone, October 13, 2016.
CHAPTER 22: “MORE CHILDREN DO NOT HAVE TO DIE”
1. Kerri Cutfeet, interviewed by the author by phone, August 12, 2017.
2. Michael Kirlew, Affidavit before the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal;
January 27, 2017.
3. Alvin Fiddler, “Re: Preventable Deaths of Our Youth,” email to Prime
Minister Justin Trudeau, January 18, 2017. Exhibit B referred to in the affidavit

324

Anna Mehler Paperny

of Dr. Michael Kirlew, Canada Human Rights Tribunal, January 27, 2017.
4. Alex Ballingall and Tanya Talaga, “Trudeau Meets with Ontario Indigenous
Leaders in Wake of Girls’ Suicides,” The Toronto Star, January 17, 2017.
5. Joshua Frogg, interviewed by the author by phone, July 12, 2017.
6. Michael Kirlew; Affidavit, January 27, 2017.
7. US Centers for Disease Control Web-based Injury Statistics Query and
Reporting System Database; accessed July 27–29, 2017.
8. Caroline Jiang et al., “Racial and Gender Disparities in Suicide among Young
Adults Aged 18–24: United States, 2009–2013,” Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, September 2015.
9. https://wemattercampaign.org
10. Gordon Poschwatta, interviewed by the author by phone, November 3, 2016.
11. Henry Harder, interviewed by the author by phone, October 28, 2016.
12. Eva Serhal et al., “Implementation and Utilisation of Telepsychiatry in
Ontario: A Population-Based Study,” Canadian Journal of Psychiatry (2017).
13. Subho Chakrabarti, “Usefulness of Telepsychiatry: A Critical Evaluation of
Videoconferencing-based Approaches,” World Journal of Psychiatry
(September 2015).
14. David Hailey et al., “Limitations in the Routine Use of Telepsychiatry,”
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare (January 2009).
15. Cindy Hardy, interviewed by the author by phone, October 20, 2016.
16. Michael Kirlew, interviewed by the author by phone, July 31, 2017.
17. Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer, “Federal Spending on Primary
and Secondary Education on First Nations Reserves,” December, 2016.
CHAPTER 23: RACE AS BARRIER
1. Hector M. Gonzalez, “Depression Care in the United States: Too Little for
Too Few,” Archives of General Psychiatry (2010).
2. Leopoldo Cabassa et al., “Latino Adults’ Access to Mental Health Care:
A Review of Epidemiological Studies,” Administration and Policy in Mental
Health (2006).
3. Carrie Farmer Teh et al., “Predictors of Adequate Depression Treatment
among Medicaid-Enrolled Adults,” Health Services Research (February 2010).
4. Rudayna Bahubeshi, “Canada: Let’s Really Talk about Mental Illness and
Who’s Most Vulnerable,” CBC.ca, October 2, 2017.
5. Rheeda Walker, interviewed by the author by phone, November 9, 2016.
6. Gursharan Virdee, interviewed by the author by phone, May 9, 2018.
7. Napoleon Harrington, interviewed by the author by phone, March 24, 2018.
8. Jasmin Pierre, interviewed by the author by phone, July 29, 2016.

Notes

325

9. Maria Chiu et al., “Ethnic Differences in Mental Illness Severity: A
Population-Based Study of Chinese and South Asian Patients in Ontario,
Canada,” J Clin Psychiatry (2016).
10. Maria Chiu, interviewed by the author by phone, October 4, 2016.
11. Maria Chiu et al., “Postdischarge Service Utilisation and Outcomes among
Chinese and South Asian Psychiatric Inpatients in Ontario, Canada:
A Population-Based Cohort Study,” BMJ Open (2018).
12. Meri Nana-Ama Danquah, Willow Weep for Me (New York: W. W. Norton,
1998), 224.
CHAPTER 24: WHO YOU GONNA CALL?
1. Susan Stefan, interviewed by the author by phone, November 3, 2016.
2. Ontario Human Rights Commission, A Collective Impact, December 10, 2018.
3. Henry J. Steadman et al., “Prevalence of Serious Mental Illness Among Jail
Inmates,” Psychiatric Services (June 2009).
4. JD Livingston, “Contact Between Police and People with Mental Disorders:
A Review of Rates,” Psychiatric Services (August 2016).
5. Adelle Waldman, “Police struggle with approach to the mentally ill,”
The Christian Science Monitor (March 17, 2004).
6. Daryl Kramp, Economics of Policing: Report of the Standing Committee on Public
Safety and National Security, May 2014, 41st Parliament, Second Session.
7. Anna Mehler Paperny, “Outgoing Toronto Police Services Board Chair Alok
Mukherjee on Reimagining Toronto Cops,” Globalnews.ca, June 18, 2015.
8. Anna Mehler Paperny, “Taser Files: What We Found in 594 Pages of Taser
Incident Reports,” Global News, July 7, 2015.
9. Joel Dvoskin, interviewed by the author by phone, November 7, 2016.
10. Peter Eisler, Jason Szep, Tim Reid, and Grant Smith, “Shock Tactics,”
Reuters, August 22, 2017.
11. Vincent Beasley, interviewed by the author by phone, November 6, 2017.
12. Wendy Gillis, “Toronto Police Curb Disclosure of Suicide Attempts to
US Border Police,” Toronto Star, August 17, 2015.
13. Scott Gilbert, interviewed by the author in Toronto, January 12, 2018.
CHAPTER 25: HOW TO TALK ABOUT WHAT WE TALK ABOUT
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT WANTING TO DIE
1. David Jobes, interviewed by the author by phone, August 1, 2016.
2. Yunqiao Wang et al., “Clinician Prediction of Future Suicide Attempts:
A Longitudinal Study,” The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry (April 2016).
3. Yunqiao Wang, interviewed by the author by phone, July 21, 2016.

326

Anna Mehler Paperny

4. Aaron T. Beck and Maria Kovacs, “Assessment of Suicidal Intention: The
Scale for Suicide Ideation,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology (1979).
5. Paul Kurdyak, interviewed by the author in Toronto, March 30, 2015.
6. Javed Alloo, interviewed by the author in Toronto, September 7, 2016.
7. Sarah Lisanby, interviewed by the author by phone, July 6, 2016.
8. Maria Oquendo, interviewed by the author by phone, July 13, 2017.
9. Marcel Adam Just et al., “Machine Learning of Neural Representations of
Suicide and Emotion Concepts Identifies Suicidal Youth,” Nature Human
Behavior (2017).
10. Tom Ellis, interviewed by the author by phone, July 26, 2016.
11. Brian Ahmedani, interviewed by the author by phone, August 1, 2016.
12. Kurt Kroenke, Robert L. Spitzer, and Janet B.W. Williams, “The PHQ-9:
Validity of a Brief Depression Severity Measure,” Journal of General Internal
Medicine (September 2001).
13. Madelyn Gould et al., “Newspaper Coverage of Suicide and Initiation of
Suicide Clusters in Teenagers in the USA, 1988–96: A Retrospective,
Population-Based, Case-Control Study,” Lancet Psychiatry (2014).
14. Madelyn Gould, interviewed by the author by phone, March 27, 2018.
15. David A. Jobes et al., “The Kurt Cobain Suicide Crisis: Perspectives from
Research, Public Health, and the News Media,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior (Fall 1996).
16. Stephanie Leon et al., “Media Coverage of Youth Suicides and Its Impact on
Paediatric Mental Health Emergency Department Presentations,” Healthcare
Policy (2014).
17. Mario Cappelli, interviewed by the author by phone, October 31, 2017.
18. Solomon, Noonday Demon, 251.
CHAPTER 26: CERTIFIABLE
1. E. Fuller Torrey, American Psychosis: How the Federal Government Destroyed
the Mental Illness Treatment System (New York: Oxford University Press,
2014), 93.
2. Claims History Database, Registered Persons Dabatase, Ontario Mental
Health Reporting System, obtained from Ontario Ministry of Health and
Long-Term Care, November 2, 2017, through media request. Data extracted
March 2017 and November 2017.
3. The number of visits by girls under eighteen being kept on two-week
certifications more than tripled; the number of monthlong stays increased
sixfold (although the starting number was small). And in almost 90 percent
of cases these girls are being held to protect themselves from themselves.
Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care, November 2017.

Notes

327

4. Integrated Analytics: Hospital, Diagnostics Workforce Branch, Health
Sector Information, Analysis and Reporting Division, obtained from British
Columbia Ministry of Mental Health and Addictions, October 23, 2017,
through media request.
5. Statistics obtained from Alberta Health Services November 15, 2017, through
media request. I was obliged to get involuntary hospitalization data for
Saskatchewan at the health region level. The number of compulsory hospital
admissions in Saskatoon Health Region increased 88 percent between 2010
and 2016, and the number of certificates issued for involuntary ECT doubled
during that time, according to statistics from the health region obtained
November 28, 2017, through access-to-information request. The number of
people put on community treatment orders province-wide more than tripled
between 2013–14 and 2016–17, according to Saskatchewan government
statistics obtained December 27, 2017, through access-to-information request.
6. Hans Joachim Salize et al., “Compulsory Admission and Involuntary
Treatment of Mentally Ill Patients—Legislation and Practice in EU-Member
States,” European Commission Health & Consumer Protection DirectorateGeneral, 2002.
7. Rosalind Adams, “What the fuck just happened?” BuzzFeed News
(December 7, 2016).
8. Tony Kovaleski, “Families accuse Colorado mental health facility of holding
patients for insurance money,” The Denver Channel (January 14, 2019).
9. Tim A. Bruckner et al., “Involuntary civil commitments after the
implementation of California’s Mental Health Services Act,” Psychiatric
Services (October 2010).
10. Hans Joachim Salize et al., “Compulsory Admission.”
11. Patrick Keown et al., “Rates of Voluntary and Compulsory Psychiatric
In-Patient Treatment in England: An Ecological Study Investigating
Associations with Deprivation and Demographics,” The British Journal of
Psychiatry (2016).
12. Scott Weich et al., “Variation in Compulsory Psychiatric Inpatient
Admission in England: A Cross-Classifed, Multilevel Analysis,” Lancet
Psychiatry (2017).
13. Black people made up 13 percent of the Toronto residents on CTOs between
2005–06 and 2010–11 despite comprising about 7 percent of the population.
R. A. Malatest and Associates Ltd., Legislated Review of Community
Treatment Orders, May 2012.
14. Jorun Rugkasa, “Why We Need to Understand Service Variation in
Compulsion,” Lancet Psychiatry, 2017.
15. Richard O’Reilly, interviewed by the author by phone, February 29, 2016.

328

Anna Mehler Paperny

16. Wendy Glauser, “Scrubbed: Ontario Emergency Room Chief Faces
Questions about Failing to Hire Any Female Doctors in 16 Years,” The Globe
and Mail, December 16, 2018.
17. Anita Szigeti, interviewed by the author by phone, July 8, 2017.
18. Treatment Advocacy Center, Browse By State, www.treatmentadvocacycenter
.org/browse-by-state.
19. Jay Chalke, Committed to Change: Protecting the Rights of Involuntary Patients
under the Mental Health Act, Special Report No. 42, March 2019.
20. Jeffrey Swanson, interviewed by the author by phone, July 18, 2016.
21. Deanna Cole-Benjamin, interviewed by the author in Kingston, ON,
November 23, 2016.
22. Leslie, interviewed by the author by phone, August 5, 2016.
23. Cindy, interviewed by the author by phone, October 9, 2016.
24. Andrew Lustig, interviewed by the author in Toronto, July 12, 2017.
25. Joel Dvoskin, interviewed by the author by phone, November 7, 2016.
26. E. Fuller Torrey, interviewed by the author in Kensington, MD, June 28, 2016.
27. Eight of 12 studies in a broad review of the evidence for community
treatment orders found they reduced hospital readmission. But
methodologies varied; the argument could be made that someone’s
improvement was due to access to intervention, rather than the compulsion
itself. Outcomes are better for people who are on CTOs for a longer period of
time but that could be because people are kept on the CTO longer explicitly
because they’re doing well. And hospitalization outcome differences between
people on orders and off them were negligible in the few studies that were
randomized. “The lack of evidence for patient benefit, particularly when
combined with restrictions to personal liberty, is striking and needs to be
taken seriously,” the study’s authors write. “Clinicians have a duty to provide
their patients with treatment in the least restrictive environment.” Jorun
Rugkasa, John Dawson, and Tom Burns, “CTOs: What Is the State of the
Evidence?” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology (February 2014).
28. Statistics obtained through media request from Ontario’s Office of the Chief
Coroner, October 18, 2017.
29. Erin Hawkes, “Medicate me, even when I refuse,” Huffington Post, 2013.
30. Daryl Geisheimer, interviewed by the author by phone, September 8, 2017.
31. Mark Lukach, My Lovely Wife in the Psych Ward (New York: HarperCollins,
2017).
CHAPTER 27: TRUST ISSUES
1. Laney, interviewed by the author by phone, August 5, 2016.
2. “The Bonnie Burstow Scholarship in Antipsychiatry,” OISE, University

Notes

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

329

of Toronto, November 16, 2016, www.oise.utoronto.ca/oise/News/Bonnie
_Burstow_Scholarship.html.
Bonnie Burstow, interviewed by the author by phone, May 19, 2017.
Husseini Manji, interviewed by the author by phone, July 7, 2016.
Gary Greenberg, Manufacturing Depression (London: Bloomsbury
Publishing, 2010), 334.
Gary Greenberg, interviewed by the author by phone, April 18, 2017.
Paul Kurdyak, interviewed by the author, March 30, 2015.
Patrick, interviewed by the author in Toronto, June 24, 2016.
Ethan McIlhenny et al., “Methodology for and the Determination of the
Major Constituents and Metabolites of the Amazonian Botanical Medicine
Ayahuasca in Human Urine,” Biomedical Chromatography (November 2010).

CHAPTER 28: FIRST PERSON AFTERWORD
1. Andrew Solomon, interviewed by the author in New York City, October 18,
2016.
2. Helen Mayberg, interviewed by the author, August 4, 2016.

Index
Note: The initials “AMP” used below refer to Anna Mehler Paperny
Abbotsford Regional Hospital, 184–85
Abby (patient), 282
Abdi, Sebastien Pavit, 184–85, 220
Adderall, 99
Adult Preventive Intervention, 68, 189
Affordable Care Act, 192
Ahmedani, Brian, 186–87, 188, 256, 258
Allergan, 136
Alloo, Javed, 52–53, 190–91, 253–54
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative, 137
American Foundation for Suicide
Prevention, 202
American Psychosis (Torrey), 264
anterior cingulotomy, 115–20
antidepressants, 37–38, 75, 86–87, 92,
103, 104–5, 106, 203–4
antipsychiatry activism, 41, 62, 103,
287–89, 291
anxiety disorder, 58
Aristotle, 53
AstraZeneca, 134
Attawapiskat First Nation, 224
autopsies, 73–74
ayahuasca, 294–95, 297
Bahubeshi, Rudayna, 228
Beasley, Vincent, 246, 248–49
Beck, Aaron, 106, 253
“Bedlam 1946” (Life), 263
“Bell Let’s Talk,” 170
biomarkers, 72–73, 157–60, 254
bipolarity, 95–96
black people
and antidepressants, 75
and Community Treatment Orders, 266
involuntary hospitalization, 265–66
mental health care, 229–36, 238–39

and psychotherapy, 228
suicide attempts, 203, 231–33
See also people of color
borderline personality disorder, 60–61
Bose, Melanie, 125, 186
Botox, 160–62
brain
analysis, 122
banks, 121–22, 127–29
childhood trauma and, 129, 130
deep brain stimulation (DBS), 141,
142–46, 147, 148, 162–63
dissection, 124–25
donations, 122–25
imaging technologies, 140, 141
neuroplasticity, 150
research, 121–31
and suicide, 129–30
Breanna (patient), 205–10
Brendan (friend), 17, 46
Bruckner, Tim, 194
bupropion, 95
Burstow, Bonnie, 287–88, 290–91, 292
buspirone (Buspar), 99
Canada Brain Research Fund, 138
Canadian Life and Health Insurers
Association, 172
Cappelli, Mario, 260
Carrier Sekani Family Services, 219, 220
Center for Disease Control, 72, 199, 202
Center for Addiction and Mental Health
(CAMH), 21, 27, 51, 59, 105, 170,
273–75, 301
Temerty Center for Therapeutic
Brain Intervention, 110
Charles, Sarah Louise, 184–85, 220
Charlie (dog), 175–76

Index

childhood trauma, 37, 129, 130, 204, 221
children/youth
antidepressants and suicidality, 203–4
Breanna (patient), 205–10
and depression, 204–5
foster homes, 212, 225
mental illness in, 199
child/youth suicide(s), 199
Breanna (patient), 205–10
among Canadian Indigenous peoples,
205–10, 212–26, 219, 224–25
Chantell Fox, 216–17
childhood trauma and, 204, 221
gender and, 218
health care and, 217
Jenera Roundsky, 217
Jolynn Winter, 212–17
among Native Americans, 205–10, 218
rates, 71, 72–73, 199–203, 218
risk factors, 204
Sheftall and, 211
Chiu, Maria, 236–38
Cindy (patient), 273
cingulotomies, 142
Cipralex (escitalopram), 92, 93–94
Cobain, Kurt, 260
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT),
106–8, 109, 120, 150
Cole-Benjamin, Deanna, 142–45, 173–74
Collaborative Assessment and
Management of Suicidality, 256, 291
Collaborative Care, 196–98
Community Treatment Orders, 266, 282
Consent and Capacity Board (Ontario),
24, 267
cortisol, 254
crisis care, 59, 192, 252
Cutfeet, Kerri, 212, 213–16
Cutler, Karen, 173
Cymbalta (duloxetine), 96, 135
Danes, Claire, 95
Danquah, Meri Nana-Ama, Willow Weep
for Me, 238–39
Daskalakis, Jeff, 110–11
Deanna (patient), 272

331

deep brain stimulation (DBS), 142–46,
148, 162
depression
age of onset, 50–51
AMP and, 23, 37–40, 41–42, 305
anxiety disorder vs, 58
and brain, 128
childhood trauma and, 37
children/youth and, 204–5
clusters of symptoms causing impairment, 51–52
diagnosis, 23, 39, 40–42, 57–63,
60–61, 147–48
and disability, 54–55
as disease/illness, 40–42, 56, 289,
292
in DSM, 55, 59, 62–63
families and, 37–38
gender and, 180–81
GPs and, 52–53, 189–91
history as mood disorder, 55
media and, 55
modernity and, 53–54
prevalence, 54, 55
research, 50–51
screening for, 188
and social withdrawal, 60–61
spectrum, 52–53
start point, 37, 38
and suicidality/suicide, 37, 69, 70
threshold, 52–53
trauma and, 61
treatment for, 51, 288–90, 292
(see also drugs; psychotherapy)
triggers, 61–62
uses of word, 41
despair, 4, 53, 55, 57
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM), 55, 57, 59,
62–63, 69, 148
disclosure of mental illness, 169–70, 171,
174, 176–77, 178–80
DiStasio, Claude, 172
DNA, 130
dopamine, 92–93, 95, 153
Dougherty, Darin, 116–20, 146–48, 162

332

Anna Mehler Paperny

Douglas Mental Health University
Institute, 129
drugs
accelerated medicines partnerships,
137–38
AMP’s therapy, 91–92, 93–101
commercial imperatives vs research
in pharmaceutical industry, 136
market potential for depression
drugs, 136–37
overdose, 133
psychotherapy combined with, 104
research/development, 120, 132–39
suicidality and, 133
See also antidepressants; and names
of specific pharmaceuticals
Dvoskin, Joel, 245, 246–47, 250, 275, 277
Effexor (Venlafaxine), 135
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 110–15,
120, 152, 158, 288
Ellis, Tom, 70–71, 255–56, 258, 259
employment, mental illness and, 168–74,
178
epigenetics, 130, 131
epilepsy, 147
escitalopram (Cipralex), 92, 297
esketamine, 152, 153–54
The Face of Emotion (Finzi), 161
families
and depression, 37–38
suicide and, 67
treatment and, 277–79, 286–87
and voluntary vs involuntary treatment, 275
Ferguson, Donna, 170
Fiddler, Alvin, 217
Finzi, Eric, 161–62
The Face of Emotion, 161
first responders, 243–44. See also police
Fishman, Mark, 134–35
Food and Drug Administration, 151,
203–4
Fox, Chantell, 216–17, 224, 225
Frame, Janet, 112, 263

Frances, Allen, 62
Frank, Cathrine, 188
Fraser Health, 185
Friedman, Richard, 100, 135, 137
Frogg, Joshua, 217
Galen, 96
Geisheimer, Brian David, 184–85, 220,
278
Geisheimer, Daryl, 278
gender
in child/youth suicides, 218
and depression, 180–81
and suicide, 72, 199, 200
general practitioners (GPs), 52–53, 189–91
Girl, Interrupted, 263
GlaxoSmithKline, 97, 134
Goethe, Johann von, The Sorrows of
Young Werther, 259
Goldner, Elliot, 61
Gould, Madelyn, 200–201, 260–61
Greenberg, Gary, 289–90
Manufacturing Depression
(Greenberg), 289
A Guide to Consent and Capacity Law in
Ontario (Szigeti), 267
Haas, Ann, 202–3
Harder, Henry, 222, 224–25
Hardy, Cindy, 222
Harrington, Napoleon, 230–31
Hawkes, Erin, 277
health care
and child/youth suicides, 217
geography and, 228
Indigenous peoples of Canada, 216–18,
225
poverty and, 228
See also mental health care
Henry Ford Health System
Behavioral Health Services research,
186–88
Zero Suicide strategy, 187–88
Hirshbein, Laura, 55
Homeland, 95
hope/hopelessness, 70–71
hospitals/hospitalization

Index

deinstitutionalization from, 263
discharges from, 21–22, 185–86, 196
transinstitutionalization, 263
voluntary vs involuntary admission
to, 13–14, 20–21, 23–24, 264–83
See also psychiatric hospitals;
psychiatric wards
Human Rights Tribunal, 217
Hyman, Steven, 102, 133, 134, 136, 139
hyperthermia, 120
imipramine, 132–33
Indigenous people
child/youth suicides among, 212–26,
219, 224–25
health care, 216–17, 225
mental health care, 219–25
Native American child/youth suicides,
205–10, 218
residential school legacy, 224–25
systemic deprivation, 212
teen suicides, 205–10
See also people of color
Insel, Thomas, 62, 112, 159
insulin comas, 120
insurance, 168–74, 172, 192, 193–94, 197–98
iproniazid, 132
Ishaq ibn Imran, 53
isolation, 39, 77, 175
Jacques (Beasley’s nephew), 249
Janssen Pharma, Neuroscience
Therapeutic Area, 151–54, 288
Jasmin (patient), 231–36
Jobes, David, 251–52, 256, 291
Jobs, Steve, 17
Jolie, Angelina, 263
Kaiser Permanente, 172
Kaitin, Ken, 136, 137, 138, 159
Kellner, Charles, 111, 113–14, 288
Kennard, Betsy, 204–5
ketamine, 149–54, 288, 295, 296, 297
Kirlew, Michael, 217, 225–26
Kurdyak, Paul, 51–52, 185–86, 195, 196,
253, 289

333

lamotrigine, 99, 100
Laney (mother), 284–87
Latin American people
and mental health care, 228
suicide attempts, 203
Latinx (Latino/Latina), 228
Leslie (patient), 272–73
LGBTQ youth, 202–3
Life magazine, “Bedlam 1946,” 263
Lilly, 135
Lipska, Barbara, 122, 123, 126, 127, 128
Lisanby, Sarah, 54–55, 72–73, 162–63, 254
lithium, 95–96, 100
lobotomies, 115–16, 119, 120
LSD, 297
Lukach, Mark, My Lovely Wife in the
Psych Ward, 278–79
Lustig, Andrew, 273–75, 279–80
Madness in Civilization (Scull), 59
magic mushrooms. See psilocybin
Manji, Husseini, 151–54, 159, 288
Manufacturing Depression (Greenberg),
289
Manulife, 173
Marcella (mother of Breanna), 205–10
marginalized people
and mental health care, 195
mental illness and, 227
suicide rates, 75–76
treatment for, 75
See also people of color; race
Mary (patient), 171, 174–75
Massachusetts community crisis model,
247
Massachusetts General Hospital, 116,
146, 162
May, Darrick, 154–57
Mayberg, Helen, 140–46, 147, 162, 305
media
and depression, 55
and suicide, 260–61
Medicaid, 193, 228
Medtronic, 145
melancholy/melancholia, 53–54

334

Anna Mehler Paperny

Memphis Crisis Intervention Team
(CIT), 246, 247–49
Menninger Clinic, 70, 181, 182
Mental Health Act (Ontario), 244
mental health care
black people and, 228–36, 238–39
Chinese Canadians and, 236, 238
clustered teams, 196–97
Collaborative Care, 197–98
“concierge” for, 59
cracks in system, 185–91
crisis, 192
culture and, 236–39
for discharged patients, 185–86, 196
geography and, 195
immigrants and, 237
Indigenous peoples of Canada, 219–25
insurance for, 197–98
payment for, 193–98
pushing for, 194–95
quitting, 229–30
race and, 227–28
religion and, 230
severity of illness and, 195
South Asian Canadians and, 230,
236, 238
traditional medical model, 196–97
variable quality of, 194
mental hospitals. See psychiatric hospitals
mental illness
diagnosis, 52–53
disclosure of, 169–70, 171, 174, 176–77,
178–80
employment and, 168–74, 178
GPs and, 52–53
as illness, 287, 288, 291–92
and insurance, 168–74
marginalization and, 227
and medically assisted death, 257
Patrick (patient), 293–98
rejection of idea of, 291–92
and suicide, 69
and trust, 284, 288
See also depression
Merck, 135, 136
methanol, 19–20

Michael (patient), 181–83
Michelle (patient), 178–80
Million-Dollar Martin, 244
mindfulness, 106–8
Mind Over Mood (Greenberger and
Padesky), 106–7, 318
Mindstrong, 159–60
modernity, 53–54
monoamine oxidase, 132
inhibitors (MAOI), 86, 96–99
mood disorders, 54
Mukherjee, Alok, 250
Mulsant, Benoit, 59, 105
My Lovely Wife in the Psych Ward
(Lukach), 278–79
National Alliance on Mental Illness, 286
National Coalition for Mental Health
Recovery, 286
National Comorbidity Survey, 54
National Institute of Mental Health
(NIMH), 54, 126, 138, 147, 227–28
Human Brain Collection Core, 121, 123
Sequenced Treatment Alternatives
to Relieve Depression Study
(STAR*D), 101
Suicide Research Consortium, 68, 189
National Institutes of Health, 137
Native Americans. See under Indigenous
people
negative cognitive bias, 38, 177
nervous illness, 53–54
neurocircuitry, 72–73
neuroplasticity, 150
neurotransmitters, 92–93, 153
Nicholson, Jack, 112
The Noonday Demon (Solomon), 53, 100,
261, 302, 314, 327
norepinephrine, 92–93, 95, 96
Novartis, 134–35
olanzapine, 86, 96, 283
Olfson, Mark, 189, 193
Omar (friend), 17, 27, 86, 99
One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest (Kesey),
112, 263

Index

Ontario Institute for Studies in
Education (OISE), 287, 290
Oquendo, Maria, 69–70, 193–94, 254
O’Reilly, Richard, 277
Parnate. See tranylcypromine (Parnate)
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9),
256–57
Patrick (patient), 292–98
Pearson, Jane, 68, 72, 189, 196, 201–2
Peck, Michael, 77–78
people of color
in clinical pharmaceutical trials, 104
consultation with clinicians, 231
and mental health care, 227–28
suicide of LGBTQ , 203
white therapists and, 239
See also black people; Indigenous
people; race
Percocet, 65
Pfizer, 135–36, 261–62
police, 243–50
AMP and, 6–7, 11
Poschwatta, Gordon, 218–20, 221
poverty
and health care, 228
and involuntary hospitalization, 265
race and, 229
Prozac, 135
psilocybin, 154–57
psychedelics, 149–57
psychiatric hospitals
Cindy (patient), 273
conditions, 263, 267–68, 271–73,
279–80
Deanna (patient), 271–72
Leslie (patient), 272–73
numbers of beds, 266
outpatient community resources
replacing, 263–64
patients’ rights, 266–67
and suicide, 276–77
voluntary vs involuntary admission,
47–48
psychiatric wards
Abbotsford Regional Hospital, 184–85

335

AMP in, 6–8, 12–21, 23–36, 82–85
psychological autopsies, 77–78
psychotherapy, 46–47, 104, 106–9, 120,
158, 192, 217, 228
Public Health Agency of Canada, 73, 74–75
Puyat, Joseph, 194
race
and interactions with police/paramedics, 243–44
and marginalization, 227
and poverty, 229
See also marginalized people; people
of color
recovery learning centers, 247
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). See under transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS)
RNA, 127, 130–31
Roberts, Laura Weiss, 160
Robinson, Joseph, 248
Rockett, Ian, 73–74, 75, 76, 77
Roundsky, Jenera, 217, 224, 225
Sanacora, Gerard, 149–51, 154
Sanofi, 135, 136
Schoenbaum, Michael, 108, 196–98
Scull, Andrew, 53–54
Madness in Civilization, 59
serotonin, 92, 93, 99, 153, 294
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), 86, 92–93, 96
sertraline, 99, 100
shame, 178
Sheftall, Arielle, 200, 201, 211
Sirovatka, Jonathan, 122–25
The Sisters Brothers (deWitt), 12
social media, 259–60
Solomon, Andrew, 135, 302–4
The Noonday Demon, 53, 100, 261, 302
The Sorrows of Young Werther (Goethe),
259
Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research,
102, 133
Stanley Medical Research Institute, 127
Stefan, Susan, 243, 247

336

Anna Mehler Paperny

stigma, 167–68, 174, 222
St. Joseph’s Health Center, 6–7, 11, 12–21,
23–36, 82
St. Jude Medical, 145
suicidality/suicidal ideation
AMP and, 4, 23–24, 64–66
antidepressants and, 103, 203–4
Botox and, 161–62
and Canada-US border, 246
contagion theory, 259–60, 261
curiosity and, 66
depression and, 69, 70
dissuasion from, 251–52
and drugs, 133
in DSM, 69–70
epigenetics and, 130
hope/hopelessness and, 70–71
and information-sharing, 246–47
LGBTQ youth and, 202–3
medically assisted death, 257
no-suicide contracts, 258
as pathology, 69–70
pre-suicide priorities and, 66–67
questions to ask regarding, 255, 256–57
as rational decision, 257
and suicide-specific interventions, 70
talking about, 251–62
as treatable symptom of mental
illness, 260–61
treatment of, 255–56, 258
suicide attempts
AMP and, 3–4, 9, 10–12, 43–49,
66–67, 79–82
black people and, 203, 231–33
cortisol and, 254
as crimes, 69
gender and, 72
insurance and, 172
Jasmin (patient), 231–33
Latinx individuals and, 203
LGBTQ , 202
risk assessment, 252–54, 256
unsuccessful, 75
suicide rates
attempts, 199
Canadian, 71

gender and, 72, 199, 200
global, 54, 71
marginalized populations, 75–76
US, 72–73
youth, 71, 72–73, 199–203
suicide(s)
autopsies and numbers of, 73–74
brain and, 129–30
childhood trauma and, 129
classification as accidents, 74–75, 76
classification of deaths as, 73
clothing for, 67
clusters, 184–85, 259–60
depression and, 37
disbelief regarding, 77–78
evidence-based care vs, 69
and families, 67
gun epidemic and, 71
hospitalization and, 276–77
impulse to live vs, 68–69
lack of investment in prevention, 74
media reporting on, 260–61
mental illness and, 69
pacts, 212
prevention, 68
procrastination as prevention, 67–68
psychological autopsies, 77–78
psychological flexibility and, 71
religions and, 69
risk assessment, 185
risk factors, 70
screening for, 185, 188
social media and, 259–60
sub-intentional, 77
toll on community, 76
undercounting/-reporting, 73–76
Swanson, Jeffrey, 270, 271
Szigeti, Anita, 266–67, 282
A Guide to Consent and Capacity Law
in Ontario, 267
Tasers, 244–50
teenagers. See children/youth
13 Reasons Why, 201
Tikinagan Child and Family Services,
213

Index

Toronto Police crisis intervention, 249–50
Torous, John, 160
Torrey, E. Fuller, 275, 276
American Psychosis, 264
Toxoplasma gondii, 62
transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS), 110
repetitive (rTMS), 110–11, 115, 158, 296
tranylcypromine (Parnate), 80, 83, 86,
96–99
treatment
advance directives, 270–71
banning of methods, 287–88
clinical compassion and, 280
combinations of types, 104
data mining for, 159–60
for depression, 51, 288–90, 292
evidence-based, 233
families and, 275, 277–79, 286–87
marginalized populations and, 75
methods, 120, 290–91
patients’ rights, 266–67, 277–79
personalized, 157–60
of suicidality/suicide ideation, 255–56,
258, 260–61
and trust, 276, 280, 292
uncertainty regarding methods, 108–9
voluntary vs. involuntary, 264–83, 292
See also drugs; mental health care;
psychotherapy
Trintellix (vortioxetine), 99
Trivedi, Madhukar, 50–51, 101, 103–4, 158
Trudeau, Justin, 217
trust
loss of, 284
mental illness and, 284, 288
treatment and, 276, 280, 292
Turecki, Gustavo, 129–31
tyramine, 97–98
US Customs and Border Protection, 246
Verily, 159
Virdee, Gursharan, 230

337

Walker, Rheeda, 229–30
Wang, Yunqiao, 252
Wapakeka First Nation, 216, 217
Webster, Maree, 127–28
Wellbutrin (see also bupropion), 95
We Matter campaign, 218
Wesley (friend), 10, 11, 17
Willow Weep for Me (Danquah), 238–39
Winter, Jolynn, 212–17, 224, 225
World Health Organization, 54, 138
youth. See children/youth; child/youth
suicide(s)
Zeldox (ziprasidone), 99–100
Zoloft (sertraline), 99, 135
Zyprexa (olanzapine), 96

About the Author
Anna Mehler Paperny is a Toronto-based reporter for Reuters.
She’s chased down stories ranging from the opioid crisis to migration, from post-quake Haiti to Guantanamo Bay. She has also been
a staff reporter at The Globe and Mail and a reporter-editor for Global
News. Her work on Canadian prison deaths won the RTDNA Dan
McArthur Award for investigative journalism.

ANNA MEHLER PAPERNY is a Toronto-based

reporter for Reuters. She’s chased down stories
ranging from the opioid crisis to migration, from
post-quake Haiti to Guantanamo Bay. She has also
been a staff reporter at The Globe and Mail and a
reporter-editor for Global News, where she developed globalnews.ca’s award-winning Investigative
Data Desk. Her work on Canadian prison deaths
won the RTDNA Dan McArthur Award for investigative journalism.
Find Anna on Twitter @amp6
If you are thinking about suicide,
call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline:
1-800-273-8255 (TALK)
Additional resources are available under
“Resources and Further Reading” at the
back of this book.

theexperimentpublishing.com | @experimentbooks
Also available as an ebook and a Tantor Media audiobook

I N T E R N AT I O N A L B E S T S E L L E R
Acclaim for

★ Finalist for the Hilary Weston Writers’ Trust Prize for Nonfiction ★
“As gripping a memoir as it is a commanding work of journalism. . . . Personable and
passionate—and full of raucous, life-affirming humor—the book casts much-needed
light on one of the most persistent and mystifying diseases of our time.”
—IVAN COYOTE, TREVOR HERRIOT, and MANJUSHREE THAPA

(2019 Hilary Weston Writers’ Trust Prize jury)

“Anna Mehler Paperny plumbs the depths of her own acute depression, and
also investigates the cultural, social, and historical discourse around despair.
She writes with a stunning fluency.”
—ANDREW SOLOMON, author of The Noonday Demon

“I learned so much from this engaging, well-researched, courageous book. It
belongs in the canon of ‘must-reads’ to understand mental health treatment today.”
—MARK LUKACH, author of My Lovely Wife in the Psych Ward

“Raw, frank, and dark-humored . . . Mehler Paperny does a masterful job of
delving into the complexities of living with depression.”
—THE GLOBE AND MAIL

“Journalist Mehler Paperny offers a startling and intimate portrait. . . .
This earnest and informative volume serves as a frank guide for those
dealing with depression.” —PUBLISHERS WEEKLY, STARRED REVIEW
“Well-researched, engaging, and highly readable . . . eye-opening and humane.”
—KIRKUS REVIEWS
MEMOIR | PSYCHOLOGY

