“What a wonderful exploration into the language of intimacy,
relationships, and love! In this deeply insightful book, you will be exposed
to the key ingredients of an intimate relationship: self-love, self-worth, and
self-awareness. I highly recommend this book to anyone interested in
engaging in life and love in an empowered way!”
—Shefali Tsabary, PhD, New York Times bestselling author and
psychologist

“As modern dating increasingly gets reduced to a narrow set of online
search algorithms, Alexandra H. Solomon wisely implores readers to turn
off the noise, tune into our authentic selves, and cultivate a deeper sense of
relational self-awareness. Loving Bravely will show you how to go beyond
merely swiping left or right, scrolling up and down, and instead live and
love in ways that are true to your unique, multidimensional self.”
—Ian Kerner, PhD, LMFT, New York Times bestselling author of She
Comes First

“Alexandra H. Solomon has written the best book ever about creating,
developing, and nurturing relationships. Loving Bravely is very special and
unique among books on relationships. First, it is anchored in the scientific
knowledge about relationships, yet is engaging and interesting. Second, it
speaks to the issues of the twenty-first century for young and mid-life people
in relationships. And, it centers primarily on what individuals can do
themselves to nurture relationships. This is the manual for any person who
wants to nurture and preserve a satisfying relationship.”
—Jay Lebow, PhD, ABPP, clinical professor at The Family Institute at
Northwestern University, and editor of Family Process

“Alexandra H. Solomon has written a clear-eyed, practical guidebook
on nothing less than how to love. Loving Bravely covers everything from
how to shift beyond your own reactivity to how to offer an effective apology.

Years of clinical experience shine through a book I’d recommend to anyone
interested in loving well.”
—Terry Real, founder of the Relational Life Institute in Massachusetts,
and author of The New Rules of Marriage

“This is a powerful book that beautifully lays out the path to having a
healthier love relationship with others, by first having a healthier love
relationship with yourself. Written in an engaging manner and full of
practical exercises, this book is a godsend to anyone searching for, but
struggling to find, true love in their lives.”
—Kristin Neff, PhD, associate professor in the department of
educational psychology at The University of Texas at Austin, and author of
Self-Compassion

“We all want to be in love or fall in love. But as Alexandra H. Solomon
so persuasively argues, most of us spend more time learning to drive than
learning to love. Clear-eyed and compassionate, Solomon provides step-bystep guidance on how to gain the skills needed to make a relationship—even
a good one—deeper, more satisfying, and more intimate. Loving Bravely
should be required reading for anyone involved in an intimate relationship
and compulsory for anyone yearning to have one. As Solomon asks, are you
willing to invest in love?”
—Elsa Walsh, author of the best-selling Divided Lives, and former staff
writer for The New Yorker and The Washington Post

“Alexandra H. Solomon’s Loving Bravely is a terrific guidebook for
anyone contemplating or engaged in an intimate relationship. This book
brings together Solomon’s experience over the last twenty years studying
couples, treating couples, immersing herself in couples therapy literature,
and lastly, being coupled. First as a graduate student, and then a
psychologist and professor at Northwestern University; as a therapist at

The Family Institute at Northwestern University; and as a wife, Solomon
has lived and breathed close relationships. No one knows this terrain better
from both the inside and the outside. The wisdom in this book focuses on the
concept of ‘know thyself first, fix thyself first, face thyself first.’ Loving over
the long haul means developing the courage to face yourself and your
partner with honesty, integrity, and compassion. Loving Bravely provides
the keys to becoming a better partner and a better person, not the keys to
fixing or changing your partner. I recommend this book to anyone who
wants to be a better lover in the truest and deepest sense.”
—Bill Pinsof, PhD, LMFT, ABPP, founder, chief executive, and
clinical professor at The Family Institute at Northwestern University, 19862016; and president of Pinsof Family Systems

“Alexandra H. Solomon delivers a beautifully relatable, encouraging,
and practical book that walks the reader through the steps toward brave,
intimate love. Her style creates safety and warmth from start to finish as she
asks the readers to lean into vulnerability and connect with themselves in
order to connect more deeply with others. Loving Bravely is a must-read for
anyone interested in creating fulfilling and satisfying love while also
transforming their relationships!”
—Vienna Pharaon, LMFT, founder of Mindful Marriage and Family
Therapy in New York, NY, and relationship expert for Motherly

Publisher’s Note
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the
understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering psychological,
financial, legal, or other professional services. If expert assistance or
counseling is needed, the services of a competent professional should be
sought.
Distributed in Canada by Raincoast Books
Copyright © 2017 by Alexandra H. Solomon
New Harbinger Publications, Inc.
5674 Shattuck Avenue
Oakland, CA 94609
www.newharbinger.com
Excerpt from “Dear Love” is copyright © Alexandra Folz; used by
permission of the author.
Excerpt from “The Invitation” from THE INVITATION by Oriah.
Copyright © 1995 by Oriah. Reprinted by permission of HarperCollins
Publishers.
Lines from “A Great Wagon” from THE ESSENTIAL RUMI by Jalal
al-Din Rumi, traneptated by Coleman Barks. Copyright © 1997 by
Coleman Barks. Used by permission.
Cover design by Amy Shoup; Text design by Michele Waters-Kermes;
Acquired by Melissa Valentine; Edited by Erin Raber
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data on file

This book is dedicated to my most loving teachers:
Todd who teaches me about trust
Brian who teaches me about faith
Courtney who teaches me about joy
You are my world

And there you are
standing by
giving me space
to draw you close
conjuring
feeling and knowing
into touch
whispers
and light
on a page written
to the beat
of the very
you
that got me
here
we will make history
anew
dear Love
mastering
ourselves
in the midst
of each other
Loving Bravely
—(from “Dear Love” by Alexandra Folz)

Contents
Foreword vii
Introduction: The Love Classroom 1

PART 1: SELF-REFLECTION
LESSON 1 UNDERSTAND YOUR PAST 12
LESSON 2 CRAFT YOUR STORY 20
LESSON 3 AWAKEN TO YOUR LIFE TODAY 29
LESSON 4 FORGE A NEW CONNECTION 38
LESSON 5 ESTABLISH HEALTHY BOUNDARIES 48
PART 2: SELF-AWARENESS
LESSON 6 EMBRACE YOUR UNIQUE LOVE TRUTHS 62
LESSON 7 SURRENDER THE FAIRY TALE 72
LESSON 8 KEEP THE SOUL IN SOULMATE 82
LESSON 9 LISTEN TO YOUR GUT 89
LESSON 10 SOURCE YOUR LIFE 97
PART 3: SELF-EXPRESSION
LESSON 11 INHABIT YOUR BODY 108
LESSON 12 HONOR THE SPACE BETWEEN 124
LESSON 13 RESPECT THE PAUSE 134
LESSON 14 DIG A LITTLE DEEPER 147
LESSON 15 BUILD THE CUSHION 157
PART 4: SELF-EXPANSION
LESSON 16 PRACTICE A LOVING “I’M SORRY” 170
LESSON 17 FORGIVE…AGAIN AND AGAIN 180

LESSON 18 VALUE PRESENCE 189
LESSON 19 BE ON YOUR OWN TEAM 200
LESSON 20 RIDE THE WAVES 207
Conclusion 214
Acknowledgments 219

APPENDIX 1 TRAUMA 222
APPENDIX 2 HOW TO FIND A THERAPIST 225
References 228

Foreword

Most of us love to be in love—but often we don’t know how to find love
or how to sustain it. In this remarkable book, Alexandra Solomon addresses
both issues as she takes us on a journey of discovery, exploring the
wonders, challenges, and dilemmas of love. Loving Bravely empowers the
reader to shift from how to find Mr. or Ms. Right to how to be Mr. or Ms.
Right. Alexandra identifies the key skills for being a great lover—not just in
bed but also throughout the day. To be a great lover you need to develop
“relational self-awareness”—understanding what makes you tick.
Alexandra encourages us to examine our stories about love, sex, gender,
and commitment. As she notes, these stories we tell ourselves shape our
reactions, often in ways that leave us unhappy. Taking ownership of our
own stories opens up a space for us to write a more successful narrative. In
my own book I also explore the idea that, rather than being a victim in your
life, you can be an author of your life and your relationship. Alexandra
Solomon’s book gives you a terrific roadmap for becoming the author of
your own relational life.
Alexandra defines bravery as the courage to face yourself, to identify
your vulnerabilities and ways of navigating in the relational world. To be
brave in love is also to accept that love is messy and constantly evolving.
Rather than thinking in black and white terms, she encourages us to
embrace the gray area—to see the circularity of our dances with our partner
and to embrace the dialectics of love. The same person who loves and
protects us can let us down at times; we are kind and considerate, but we
can be selfish and reactive when we feel threatened. Accepting the
“both/and” nature of life and of love is part of the wisdom that Alexandra
offers us.
In my work with distressed couples, I help them develop skills of
“relational empowerment”—which includes emotion regulation, empathy,
and generosity. Alexandra offers techniques that facilitate these skills. She
suggests that we find a space between stimulus (when someone you love
says things that upset you) and response (when you blow up at that
person!). We don’t have to react on automatic pilot, driven by our emotional

brain. We can pause and ask, as Alexandra suggests, “What would love
do?” We can respond with our higher brain, choosing a more mature
response. Alexandra encourages us to examine how we “show up for love.”
In her view, we are not just passive recipients of what our partner dishes
out. We can make choices that allow us to be successful lovers in the
broadest sense.
The opening metaphor Alexandra uses in her introduction is of a driver
in a car. This metaphor reappears in the book: she asks us, “Who’s in the
driver’s seat of your life?” We could say that this book is a kind of Driver’s
Ed manual for your relational life. She offers this manual not in a cookbook
kind of way—love can’t be reduced to a bunch of how-tos. And she doesn’t
offer her ideas in a holier-than-thou preachy way. Alexandra Solomon
offers her wisdom about relationships—and there is a lot of wisdom in this
book—in an inviting, accessible, often funny way. In addition to
referencing key ideas from psychology and relationship science, she shares
vignettes from her clinical practice and from her own life. She is slogging
through the same relational mud as the rest of us—and she invites us along
on her own journey in the relational realm.
Love is not a destination; it is a process. To be a great lover, you need to
develop skills of emotional intelligence. Alexandra offers us practical tools
to develop these skills, along with ways to step outside of our own narrow
beliefs and assumptions. She encourages us to develop authorship and
freedom in our love lives.
You are in for a treat as you read this book. Alexandra’s tone is witty,
irreverent, and inviting. She understands the challenges of the current
dating culture, as well as the ways we can get stuck in our own relational
perspective based on our family history, culture, and gender training. In a
delightful manner, Alexandra challenges us to name our assumptions and to
grow so we can cultivate a more successful narrative. She encourages us to
love ourselves so we can love another, and to bring self-compassion to our
vulnerabilities. Go on the journey with her—you will come out wiser on the
other side, with great tools to become the hero or heroine of your own love
story.
—Mona DeKoven Fishbane, PhD

Author, Loving with the Brain in Mind: Neurobiology and Couple
Therapy
Director, Couple Therapy Training, Chicago Center for Family Health

Introduction

The Love Classroom
If he desired to know about automobiles, he would, without question,
study diligently about automobiles. If his wife desired to be a gourmet cook,
she’d certainly study the art of cooking, perhaps even attending a cooking
class. Yet, it never seems as obvious to him that if he wants to live in love,
he must spend at least as much time as the auto mechanic or the gourmet in
studying love.
—Leo Buscaglia

I remember the day I took my driving test at sixteen, sitting nervously at
the DMV, frantically reviewing street signs in my head. I’d been preparing
for more than a year. And while I had some trepidation about being trusted
with this huge responsibility, I felt ready. Dammit, I had read the manual
over and over and logged lots of practice time behind the wheel! When I
plunged headfirst into a relationship with my husband, however, I had no
such preparation. I didn’t study for months about how to make a
relationship last before leaning in for that first kiss. I didn’t worry about the
safety of my heart or his until years later when I already felt deeply
invested. Why didn’t I put the same due diligence into learning how to “do”
love as I did into learning how to drive?
We assume that people ought to just know how to “do” love. And that is
a huge problem. It’s the very problem I have been addressing for almost
twenty years in my therapy office, in my graduate teaching, and in an
undergraduate course I teach at Northwestern University called “Building
Loving and Lasting Relationships: Marriage 101.” As you might imagine,
this course is very popular and has received lots of media attention over the
years because it is unique, which unfortunately reflects the fact that we have
yet to figure out how to really value relationship education. Over the years,
many people have told me that they wished they had had the chance to take
a class like “Marriage 101” before committing to an intimate relationship.

What’s worse is that those who are wise enough to seek a better
understanding of themselves often end up feeling ashamed of themselves
for doing so. I see this over and over in my clinical work. When an engaged
couple comes to see me for premarital therapy, more often than not they
begin our first session by making a self-conscious statement such as, “I
can’t believe we are doing couples therapy before we have even walked
down the aisle.” I quickly jump in and say that I wish all couples were so
thoughtful and brave.
As a culture, we are obsessed with the idea of love—consider the $40
billion wedding industry and the entire genre of romance-based reality
television. However, we are not nearly so obsessed with investing in love—
note the divorce rate that hovers around 50 percent. All around us are
people struggling in their intimate relationships, yet most of us are more
than willing to enter into a committed intimate relationship or marriage with
little or no preparation whatsoever.

Relational Self-Awareness
As I was preparing to write this book, I spent time reading popular books
written for single people. Some offer tricks to “get” someone to fall in love
with you: do this, say this. Others offer rules: don’t text first, don’t have sex
for X number of dates. The message in most of these books seems to be: “If
you listen to your intuition, you will screw it up and get hurt.” I was
cringing the whole time. I can certainly understand the wish for a recipe or
a prescription—something to bring order to the confusion that love
inevitably brings. But the problem with following somebody else’s truth is
that it puts you at risk of losing touch with your own. In this book, I will not
tell you what to do or how to feel about your intimate relationship, but I
will offer you the tools you need to make healthy and self-aware choices.
Connecting in an intimate way with someone else must start from
within; it must come from a deep and courageous relationship with
yourself. Loving somebody else requires us to be courageous, vulnerable,
and real. And you cannot be real with someone else unless and until you can
be real with yourself.
I don’t believe you should simply wait around for that special someone
to pop into your life. I believe that your bravest and best work is to look at

yourself, understand yourself, and grow yourself so that you can be that
special someone. I have seen this happen over and over with friends, with
students, and with therapy clients. When we pay attention to and take
responsibility for how we “do” love, we attract partners who are similarly
curious, compassionate, and willing to be vulnerable. And we create
intimate relationships that can go the distance—intimate relationships that
value deep and authentic connection.
Self-awareness means knowledge of your own history, character,
feelings, motives, and desires. This book is about relational self-awareness:
understanding in a deep and heartfelt way how you “show up” for love. All
the relationship tips, skills, and tools in the world will not add up to much
unless they rest upon a foundation that is made up of your ongoing
commitment to a brave, curious, and compassionate relationship with your
own internal world. It will come as no surprise that relational selfawareness is at the heart of the “Marriage 101” course. Based on my many
years of studying intimate relationships as a professor, couples therapist,
and intimate partner, I can say with confidence: relational self-awareness is
the cornerstone of all healthy intimate relationships.

Love Today
We expect much more from intimate relationships than we did fifty or one
hundred years ago. Historically—and in many parts of the world today—
love is not the foundation for marriage. In other times and other places,
people married for economic, political, social, and familial reasons. Today,
we expect our intimate partner to be our lover, best friend, confidant,
coparent, and sometimes business partner. Some have argued that perhaps
our divorce rate is so high because we actually have overburdened marriage
with unrealistic and overly romantic expectations (Coontz 2006).
We are loving in the digital age, and we are just beginning to grasp the
intricate ways that being plugged in affects how we love. Online dating
apps create the illusion of endless choice, which can stir feelings of
excitement as well as paralyzing anxiety. This virtual marketplace of love
draws our attention outside of ourselves, putting us at greater risk than ever
of believing that love is all about making the right choice. Certainly,
choosing a compatible partner is one part of the equation. But it is just that

—one part. All we can ever truly control is what we are bringing into a
relationship.
In addition, scrolling social media day after day means that we are
powerfully and subtly consuming other people’s images and definitions of
love. It is more difficult than ever to create and embody our own beliefs and
values about love when we are flooded by everyone else’s carefully edited
and curated love stories. Given all the noise that is part of the digital age,
relational self-awareness is more difficult than ever. And in order to be
successful in love, relational self-awareness is more important than ever.

Brave Love
Quieting the noise and clearing the clutter allows us to deepen our
relationship with ourselves. As we expand our relational self-awareness, we
learn to trust ourselves and to pay attention to all the vital data that swirls
within us. This shifts how we love our intimate partner. When relational
self-awareness is our guiding principle, we realize that love is a classroom.
Romantic love is one of the most powerful vehicles for self-transformation
that we will ever encounter. As I tell my “Marriage 101” students, “Falling
in love will grow your ass up!”
Viewing love as a classroom, ripe with opportunities to learn and grow,
creates a shift within you. You begin to view your intimate partner as your
teacher (and yourself as his or her teacher too). You see that everything that
happens within your intimate relationship holds the possibility for personal
transformation, and, from a place of curiosity and connection, you rise to
the challenges of romantic love rather than fighting against them or running
from them. Loving bravely means:
Committing to the ongoing practice of relational self-awareness
Understanding the stories you carry about love
Accepting that there are no quick fixes or easy answers
Striving for authenticity
Being willing to look at your role in relationship challenges

Seeing your partner as deeply connected to you and completely
separate from you
Viewing your differences as opportunities for growth rather than
threats
Seeking shades of gray, not black and white answers
Feeling energized, rather than defeated, by the work of loving your
partner
Loving yourself because of, and not in spite of, your imperfections
and tender spots
Loving your partner because of, and not in spite of, his or her
imperfections and tender spots
Loving like this is the work of a lifetime. As lovers, we are never done,
fixed, or perfect. Nor would we want to be, as love thrives in the messy
richness of me, you, and us. Brave love simply means that we commit
ourselves to staying with the messy richness of love instead of ignoring it,
suppressing it, or being crushed by it.
Whether you plan to marry or not, it is likely that intimate relationships
are and will be central in your life. As mammals, the desire for intimate
connection is woven into our DNA. I use the term “intimate relationship”
because it is inclusive of a variety of stages and forms of relationships. The
lessons in this book are relevant to any type of intimate relationship and any
stage of intimate relationship development (dating, committed, living
together, engaged, or married).

How to Use This Book
This book is a courageous journey within, offering twenty lessons that will
grow your relational self-awareness so that you can love more bravely and
deeply than ever before. These lessons are divided into four parts, each with
its own intention:

Part 1: Self-Reflection. The intention is to learn how the past
affects the present. We will gather answers to the questions: “What
did I learn about love when I was growing up? How do my
relationships with the people who raised me shape who I am in my
intimate relationships?”
Part 2: Self-Awareness. The intention is to learn how cultural
messages and cultural stories shape your beliefs about intimate
relationships. We will gather answers to the questions: “What do I
believe about love? How does that shape who I am in my intimate
relationships?”
Part 3: Self-Expression. The intention is to learn how your
relationship with your internal, emotional world affects you in your
intimate relationship. We will gather answers to the questions: “How
do I relate to my emotions? How does that shape who I am in my
intimate relationships?”
Part 4: Self-Expansion. The intention is to solidify the path back to
your deep and wise internal compass. We will gather answers to the
questions: “How can I know when I have become lost from myself?
How can I find my way back to a place that is authentic and
whole?”
Although the lessons and exercises of the book are deeply personal, the
possibilities for growth and transformation through the book can be
supercharged by sharing your reflections and personal work in a group
setting. You can find the “Loving Bravely: Reading Group Guide” online at
http://www.newharbinger.com/35814.
The Name-Connect-Choose Process
As we journey through mind, body, heart, and spirit, our tool for
expanding relational self-awareness is a process I call Name-ConnectChoose. You will practice this process throughout the book as we explore a
variety of issues, topics, and questions. Change happens through the NameConnect-Choose process:

Name asks you to tell your story, identifying and declaring
something as your truth or your experience. The power in naming
comes from bringing what was buried (or out of your awareness)
into the light for examination.
Connect asks you to attune to yourself, turning your attention
within and experiencing the emotions that are attached to the
particular story you are telling. Connecting emotionally to your deep
truth breathes life into your unearthed story.
Choose asks you to take responsibility for how you love today.
Whereas a lack of awareness inevitably keeps you stuck in a loop,
conscious awareness facilitates choice. When you know more, you
can make decisions from a place of eyes-open empowerment.
You can download a handout that reminds you how the Name-ConnectChoose process works at http://www.newharbinger.com/35814.
Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Each of the book’s lessons is followed by a set of exercises that puts
that lesson into practice in your life; they are called “Steps Toward Loving
Bravely.” These are journal-writing prompts, exercises, and practices
designed to help you connect deeply with the work of the lesson, and they
are integral to your growth. Completing the “Steps Toward Loving
Bravely” will help you make the most of what this book has to offer.
Throughout the book, in order to better understand your intimate
relationships, you will be asked to look at your relationship with the people
who raised you. For the sake of simplicity, I will use the plural term
“parents” throughout the book with full awareness of and respect for the
many forms that families take. You may have grown up with two parents, or
perhaps you had one parent, a relative, or others who served as caregivers
for you. Your focus will be on the key adults who shaped your “love
template”—the foundation of how you love today.
For readers who are currently in therapy, this book may open new
avenues for you to explore with your therapist. For readers who are not in
therapy, this book is likely to kick up some dust, so to speak. In fact, many

of my students begin therapy during or after taking my courses, which is a
very good thing! Exploring these topics in the safety of a therapeutic
relationship can supercharge your relational self-awareness journey. I
believe so much in the value of therapy that I have included information
about how to find a therapist as appendix 2 at the end of this book.

Your Love Classroom
As a student, I always loved the first day of school. As a professor, I still
love it! Every year, I stand in front of the students and say, “I am awestruck
and grateful that we get to spend time together muddling through all the
complexities of love. That’s our job—to come together, share, study,
question, and discover what it is we believe, individually and collectively,
about love.”
That is how I feel about this book as well! I am grateful to have the
opportunity to explore with you in a deep, curious, personal way. As you
travel through the pages of this book—your own love classroom—I hope
your awareness expands and you grow more confident, competent, and
brave in love. I can’t tell you how to love, and I can’t give you a recipe for
success. Love is too personal and nuanced to obey any rulebook. What I
can do is support and guide you through a journey that will open you up to
your deepest truths. And I can promise that the work you will do in this
book will grow your relational self-awareness, allowing you to make vital
and healing shifts in your relationship to yourself and to your intimate
partner.

Part 1

Self-Reflection

Lesson 1

Understand Your Past
Do the best you can until you know better. Then when you know better,
do better.
—Maya Angelou

You exist in the present moment, with your past behind you and your
future ahead of you. But your past is still with you—and always will be—
and it shapes the lens through which you experience the present moment.
Your past shapes how you love.
The family you grew up in granted you your first relationship
curriculum. Your family home was your first love classroom. In that
classroom, you were offered lessons about how to give and receive love,
how to handle difference and conflict, and how to ask for your needs to be
met. Your attachment style—an alchemical blend of nature and nurture that
dictated how you reached for and connected with your caregivers—was in
place before your second birthday. And, in all likelihood, that attachment
style remains with you today. How you reached for and connected with
your caregivers is probably a lot like how you reach for and connect with
your intimate partner today. The past comes with us.
The relationship that your parents had with each other was your first
template for an intimate relationship. This is true regardless of the structure
and quality of that relationship: intact and loving, intact but unhealthy, or
severed. The relationship between your parents was your first love template
even if they never had an intimate relationship with each other—the
absence of something can still have an impact. How the adults in your life
navigated their intimate relationships taught you about love. Some of the
learning was explicit; most of it was implicit.
In the opening scene of the 2015 movie Trainwreck, Amy Schumer’s
character is a little girl sitting with her sister on the hood of the family
station wagon. Their father, by way of explaining the impending divorce,

asks the girls to repeat after him, again and again, “Monogamy isn’t
realistic.” That was some seriously explicit teaching about love! Most of
our parents more subtly offered us messages about what to expect and not
expect from an intimate relationship, and we took in a great deal by
listening, watching, and feeling how our parents loved.
Did your parents demonstrate compassion, tenderness, respect, and
honesty in their intimate relationship(s)? If so, you probably aspire to bring
those elements into your love life, as well. Did your parents demonstrate
hostility, abuse, addiction, neglect, or deceit? If so, you probably aspire to
break the chain and love differently than what you were shown.
Unfortunately, just saying, “I’ll never end up like my parents” is not enough
because many, if not most, of the messages about love that we internalize in
childhood, though impactful, are quiet and out of our direct awareness.
There’s a big difference between talking the talk and walking the walk.
Family patterns, loyalties, and legacies are strong, and unless you are
willing to explore your past, you are at risk of having old patterns in the
driver’s seat of your love life, rather than you.

No Enemies Within
It can feel frightening to explore the past. Even my graduate students resist
digging up their ancient history because it is uncomfortable, unsettling, and
painful. But they must do so in order to become competent therapists. Think
about that—these are people who are choosing to dedicate their lives to
family dynamics and yet they are hesitant to explore their own! You are not
alone in your fear!
Many of us prefer to believe that just saying “the past is the past” makes
it so. I get it. After all, what if the past was full of pain and dysfunctional
relationships? And what if it means that you are therefore incapable of
love? Fortunately, I firmly believe that nobody is damaged beyond repair.
Healing is always possible. I have seen people who grew up in really
dysfunctional families go on to become generous and devoted partners and
parents. A healthy intimate relationship is always possible—as long as both
partners are deeply committed to checking themselves when the past sneaks
into the present, as it always does. This isn’t just a onetime exercise—it’s a
lifestyle.

During a discussion in the “Marriage 101” course about the
dysfunctional family patterns surrounding addiction, infidelity, and
domestic violence, one of my students, Lena, raised her hand looking
worried. “All three of those things happened in the family I grew up in,”
she said. “Does that mean I’m doomed to fail in my intimate relationship?”
My answer was a resounding no! The fact that her family of origin—the
family she grew up in—struggled in these ways does not mean that she is
doomed to repeat unhealthy patterns, but it does mean that she has the
responsibility (and opportunity!) to explore the impact that these patterns
had on her. Awareness facilitates choice.
This notion really hit home for me when I was attending a workshop
given by Dr. Terrence Real, who described it this way: “Family dysfunction
is like fire in the woods that rolls generation to generation taking everything
in its path until one person has the courage to face the flame. That person
brings peace to her ancestors and spares those who follow.” Those of us
who grew up in families that struggled to love with integrity and wholeness
can break these patterns. Dr. Real’s words touched me deeply because they
reminded me to reframe my own healing journey. When I think about the
many hours I have spent in my own therapy and with my husband in
couples therapy, I risk feeling flooded with shame about my “brokenness.”
What helps is for me to become aware of how I negatively talk to myself
(“What is wrong with you?”) and then to shift my perspective by
remembering that I can feel proud of my deep commitment to breaking
unhealthy family patterns, some of which go back multiple generations.
Feelings of shame transform as I instead take comfort in my dedication to
living wholeheartedly (Brown 2015).
If you want or need to be the person who has the courage to face the
flames, the work you do with this book will help you chart a new course.
Being honest about your past makes it much more likely that you will be
able to enjoy a happy and healthy intimate relationship today and in the
future. Relational self-awareness is not only essential for your intimate
relationship, it is also essential if you plan to become a parent (or if you
already are one). Dr. Dan Siegel (2013) explains that “making sense of your
life is important because it supports your ability to provide emotionally
connecting and flexible relationships with your children” (38–39).

The Way Out Is Through
My student, Lena, voiced a legitimate concern. Unless she heals the parts of
herself that were hurt by the unhealthy dynamics in her family, she is at risk
of choosing a partner who is reminiscent of one or both of her parents, and
she is at risk of behaving like one or both of her parents. In an unconscious
effort to heal old wounds, we tend to fall in love with partners who are
either very similar to our parents or the exact opposite of our parents. Either
path fans the flames. Lena might be drawn to a man who is abusive like her
father or a man who is submissive and voiceless like her mother. She might
tolerate someone’s unfaithful behavior because she believes this is the best
she can expect from a man. She might behave dishonestly or violently
herself from a belief that it is better to be the perpetrator than the victim.
Or she can grow her relational self-awareness and chart a new course.
Her course. Putting out the fire and refusing to re-create what she saw and
experienced growing up will require her to engage in what I call the NameConnect-Choose process. This process is our tool of change, expanding our
relational self-awareness about how the past affects our intimate
relationships today.
Name: Call the past what it is with honesty about how you were or
are impacted.
Connect: Allow yourself to feel the impact of the past without
judgment.
Choose: Consciously choose love again and again.
Name
This first step—naming family dynamics—requires you to be brave. It
can feel disloyal to name your mother’s alcoholism. It can feel humiliating
to name your father’s infidelity. It can feel frightening to name your
brother’s suicide. Yet, those experiences, for better or for worse, are with
you today. When they remain unnamed, they are in the driver’s seat of your
love life, shaping your relationship choices. When you name them, you take
a step toward putting yourself in the driver’s seat.

Connect
This second step—feeling the impact without judgment—requires you
to go deep. It’s so easy to judge ourselves out of feelings about the past:
“My mom’s drinking wasn’t that bad. What’s the big deal?” I am in no way
advocating that we travel to and then stay stuck in the past, as that turns us
into victims. But the reality is that most of us hang out at the other extreme:
refusing to allow ourselves to grieve and feel the full weight of old hurt. As
therapists often say, “The way out is through.”
Choose
This third step becomes available when your expanded awareness
allows you to choose a path of more intimate connection with your partner.
This path is possible for you even if you were raised by people who were
not able to honor themselves or their relationship with each other in this
way. Committing to honoring your relationship with yourself as the
precursor for your relationship with everyone else means being willing to
curiously ask yourself questions like:
In what ways am I being held back by beliefs and stories that do not
serve me?
In what ways am I feeling and acting from a place of old wounds?
What can I do to shift to a place of empowerment?

Relational Self-Awareness in Action: Becoming Instead of
Seeking
What happens when you surrender the belief that the key to a successful
intimate relationship is finding Mr. or Ms. Right, and you instead deeply
trust that the key to a successful intimate relationship is becoming and
being Mr. or Ms. Right? Ask twenty-six-year-old Alexia. I have been doing
therapy with Alexia for several years. Her parents divorced when she was
twelve, and she is a member of two very complicated blended families. She
has been in several intimate relationships with guys during the course of our

work together. At first, she was blind to her role in any relationship
dynamic. Her story was simply that there was something wrong with him:
He wasn’t affectionate enough. He was too clingy. He had no ambition. He
worked too many hours.
As we worked together to make sense of her past—looking closely at
the lessons she learned from her family of origin about intimacy and
conflict—she slowly began to widen her lens, seeing how patterns from the
past shape her experiences in her relationships today.
Now she has a different approach in her current relationship. Instead of
focusing exclusively on what her partner is doing “wrong,” she watches
herself. Now, when she finds herself feeling reactive and critical of her
boyfriend, the first thing she does is turn inward so that she can have an
honest and gentle dialogue with herself. Again and again, she commits to
taking a curious stance vis-à-vis herself, wondering whether and how her
responses to the present-moment reality with her boyfriend are being
shaped by old stories from her past.
This does not mean that she blames herself when things go “wrong.”
And it does not mean that she simply bites her tongue when she feels
annoyed and frustrated, assuming it must be just her old issues acting up
again. Not at all. But it does mean that Alexia respects that she is a huge
part of the equation. She knows that the dynamics in an intimate
relationship are always made up of “your stuff,” “my stuff,” and “our stuff.”
Taking responsibility for her “stuff”—the impact of her family dynamics on
her thoughts, feelings, and beliefs about love—helps her ask for what she
needs from an empowered place rather than a blaming place. She is learning
to be Ms. Right, and her current relationship is her happiest one yet.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
The experiences you had when you were growing up shape how you think about,
feel about, and behave in your intimate relationships today.

Then and Now

Write words or phrases that capture the
nature or personality of each of the
people who raised you (for example,
short-tempered, affectionate,
opinionated, easygoing, full of energy).
Next, write words or phrases that
capture the nature or personality of the
last two or three people you dated.
Finally, place the descriptions side by
side. What do you notice? What are the
similarities? What are the differences?
Take note of how you feel as you do this
exercise. Are you aware of feeling
invested in it going a certain way or
yielding a certain outcome? If so, notice
that and try to approach the exercise as a
detective or an anthropologist—in other
words, with greater distance and
neutrality—trusting that brave
exploration paves the way to healthier
and deeper intimate connections.
Brave Choices in Action
Write down three aspects of your family
life that felt precious, beneficial, and
valuable to you when you were growing
up (for example, I appreciate that my
father’s face lit up when my siblings or I
entered the room; I appreciate that my
mother valued family meals; I
appreciate that my family had inside
jokes and lots of humor).

Also write down three aspects of your
family life that felt destructive, hurtful,
and/or unhelpful (for example, My
family rarely said “I love you”; my
parents handled their feelings by raging
and/or shutting down; my parents lied to
each other).
These lists will reveal the beliefs,
values, patterns, and traditions that you
want to carry on in your own life, as
well as the ones that you are probably
eager to leave behind. The process of
identifying what you admire and what
troubles you about your family
dynamics will go a long way toward
helping you create a healthy and happy
intimate relationship. The work of this
book will support your efforts to
embody what you value and let go of
what does not serve you in your intimate
relationship.

Lesson 2

Craft Your Story
When you can look a thing dead in the eye, acknowledge that it exists,
call it exactly what it is, and decide what role it will take in your life, then,
my beloved, you have taken the first step toward your freedom
—Iyanla Vanzant

Ten months ago, Mark and Tonya sat in my office crying, their heads
heavy in their hands. They wept tears of sadness and relief. At least
everything was finally on the table. Although their marriage had been
leveled, they could glimpse possibilities for rebuilding. The shame, rage,
and fear Mark had been carrying for years had simply become too much, so
over a stretch of exhausting days, he revealed to Tonya layer after layer of
truths that he had kept hidden deep within. He confessed to having multiple
affairs—affairs Tonya had long suspected without confirmation. He also
revealed that as an adolescent he had been sexually abused by a teacher.
Tonya’s heart was broken. She hurt everywhere as she learned what Mark
went through years ago, and she was full of rage and sadness about his
dishonest behavior in the marriage.
Today the relationship between Mark and Tonya is the strongest it has
been. Mark is devoted to his recovery. Before his world crashed around
him, he was a victim. In addition to acting out sexually, he was prone to fits
of rage, quickly blaming Tonya for the problems in the marriage and unable
to look at his own behavior. He is now a survivor. He stands honestly in his
story—the story of his abuse, the story of his inappropriate and wildly
hurtful actions, and the story of his healing. He is by no means perfect, as
that is never the goal. But he is honest, and he is brave. He takes
responsibility for the relationship challenges that resulted from his trauma
(difficulties with trust and feeling close), which means that he no longer
unfairly blames his wife. Tonya is healing as well. At first she felt that
staying in the marriage was a sign of weakness, but as she claimed much-

needed time and space to focus on herself, she unearthed her deepest truth:
wanting to stay and see what is possible within the marriage. She began
working to forgive Mark and asking for what she needs from him in order
to rebuild trust.
Not every couple could (or should) survive a chapter like this, but Mark
and Tonya are buoyed by a deep commitment to the life they built together
and a belief that “the way out is through.”

The Power of Story
Doing couples therapy with Mark and Tonya reminds me of the power of
story—how much healing is possible when we bravely claim the stories of
our lives and stand without shame in our truth. Storytelling yields
understanding within a person and between people. There is a branch of
psychology called personality psychology, and researchers in this field take
a variety of approaches to understanding a person. Some personality
psychologists say that personality is a collection of relatively stable traits
like introversion, extroversion, neuroticism, and agreeableness. Other
personality psychologists say that if you want to know someone, you need
to know his or her life story. According to these folks, our life story is our
personality. They say that we are our life story. They say that the best way
to truly know a person is to know the story they tell about the life they live.
I have loved this storytelling approach to psychology since I first
learned about it twenty-plus years ago, and honoring the power of story has
served me in the classroom, in my therapy office, and in my own selfawareness journey. It means that instead of looking for symptoms or
problems or what’s “wrong” with clients, I opt to bear witness as they
weave together the moments of their journey thus far. It means that together
we explore how their stories are serving them and how their stories are
getting in their way. Our stories have a huge impact on how we feel about
ourselves and our intimate relationships.
Think about the elements of a story. A story has a plot, events that
happen in a sequence across time. A story has characters, usually a main
character or narrator and a variety of supporting characters. A story has a
setting, a context in which everything takes place. Beyond these basics,
what we expect and desire is for a story to make sense. We like stories to

have coherence and cohesiveness, holding together and flowing through
time and space. Now think about your life story. Your life is a series of
events (or chapters) that have taken place over time, in a variety of settings,
with key others who impact and are impacted by you. The events of your
life are dots, and how you connect them illuminates and creates your very
self. The stories you tell about your life reflect all the messages you have
internalized (from yourself, family, friends, and culture) about who you are
in the world as well as messages about how the world works. How you cast
yourself in the scenes and chapters of your story reflects what you have
been told implicitly and explicitly about who you are. Are you a hero? A
villain? A victim? A warrior? A damsel in distress? A survivor?
Research shows that how we tell the story of our lives is more
meaningful than what actually happens to us. The tone and quality of the
stories we tell about ourselves and our relationships say a lot about who we
are. How we fit the events in our lives together reflects and shapes our
outlook on life. How we tell our story affects how we interact with the
world around us. Those of us whose life stories include blessings, goodness,
and hope—even within sad and painful chapters—tend to live with more
happiness and peace of mind. Those whose life stories are fragmented,
incoherent, and thin tend to struggle to connect deeply with self and others
(McAdams 2006). Your life story affects how you connect with those
around you, so creating a life story that is coherent and cohesive is a key
aspect of relational self-awareness.
The great news about our stories is that we are always in charge of
them. We are the authors! And, when we are willing to bravely explore how
we are living within our life story, we open the possibility to change course.
This doesn’t mean denying or minimizing painful events in the service of
writing a fairy tale. But it may mean that the first step toward greater
empowerment, authenticity, and wholeness is becoming aware that early
events in your life led you to be cast in a role that no longer serves you.

Life Creates Core Issues…
This shift toward greater empowerment, authenticity, and wholeness is the
essence of Mark’s transformation. Mark had habitually cast himself in the
role of a helpless victim in the story of his life. Plot lines were all about his

need to keep his guard up to protect himself from others who were out to
get him. This is indeed an accurate portrayal of the chapter in his life during
which he was abused. He was in danger and he was not protected. Yet this
traumatic chapter cast an enormous shadow on every other chapter of his
story, leading him to connect the dots in his life in a way that reflected and
perpetuated his victim stance. Haunted by a past he didn’t know how to
face, he unthinkingly but vigilantly scanned the world for potential danger:
His boss was going to betray him any day now, and his wife was deceitful
and controlling. This lens skewed his perspective, created tremendous
internal fear, and deeply compromised his ability to love. (For more about
the impact of trauma, see appendix 1.)
Even without a trauma history like Mark’s, each and every one of us has
negative themes that recur in our life stories. Let’s call these negative
themes our core issues. A core issue is a vulnerability, a tender spot. It is a
wound in need of healing—or at the very least, a still-tender scar. Core
issues are sometimes called our shadow, our emotional allergies, or our
emotional blind spots. Our core issues tend to hang just outside of our
conscious awareness, leading us to mistake our perceptions for absolute
Truth.
When we are unaware of our core issues or when we avoid or ignore
them, we actually fuel our core issues and give them power. As the opening
quote by Iyanla Vanzant reveals, looking your core issues in the eye and
calling them what they are defuses them and allows you (not your pain, not
your past) to be in charge of your life. I believe 100 percent in something
that family therapists call the health premise (Pinsof 1995). The health
premise is the idea that we are healthy until proven otherwise, and we are
inherently worthy, good, and whole. Sometimes, usually because we are in
pain, we behave in ways that are forgetful and do not honor that which we
truly are. In other words, our natural state is supportive of connection and
love (love of self and love of others). We learn hate, we learn fear, and we
learn mistrust. Keeping the health premise in mind can reduce our
resistance to looking at our core issues, as doing so helps us remember that
we are deeply okay even as we look at parts of ourselves that feel messy
and very much not okay.
When we don’t take the time to identify our specific tender spots, we
are essentially stuck in an old story—one that may have accurately

described the past but that doesn’t belong in the present. Being stuck means
we are at risk of moving through the world with little awareness and even
less control over our internal, emotional landscape. We are at risk of
unfairly blaming others. We are at risk of feeling repeatedly like a victim.
When Mark was stuck replaying his old story of pain and betrayal, he
couldn’t show up for his relationship with Tonya. Showing up means being
present and taking full responsibility for ourselves.

…Intimate Relationships Stir Them Up
In all my years as a therapist, I have yet to meet a core issue that does not
invoke my compassion and empathy. Core issues come from life
experience, from the “nurture” aspect of the nature-nurture formula. Core
issues can be created by experiences in your family of origin, experiences in
school, experiences with friends, and/or relationship experiences.
Core issues can also be created by elements of your cultural identity
intersecting with your life experiences. For example, an African American
man growing up in the United States may identify a core issue of pervasive
mistrust because of feedback he has received from the world around him
based on the color of his skin. He may develop this core issue even if he
grew up in a home where his parents provided an atmosphere of emotional
safety and security. Similarly, a woman who identifies as lesbian may find
herself struggling with a core issue of defectiveness because of societal
messages she received about what it means to be gay.
Regardless of the origin of your core issues, one thing is for sure. Your
core issues will get stirred up again and again in your intimate relationships.
You have no control over that. It is the very nature of love. What you do
have control over is how you respond when your intimate relationship
invites you into deep, close contact with your tender spots. For example,
Suzanne has a pattern of not being able to get past a first date with new
women, and her story each time is that her date “says something stupid
that’s a turnoff.” It is entirely possible that Suzanne keeps meeting Ms.
Wrong. But I would invite her to entertain the hypothesis that this pattern
reflects a core issue within her, and that her story about herself and the
world around her is getting in her way.

Perhaps she is afraid of being judged harshly, so she judges others
first.
Perhaps she is afraid of getting left behind, so she leaves first.
Perhaps she is full of negative self-talk, so she is as critical of others
as she is of herself.
Transforming this pattern and getting to a second date requires her to
bravely examine how the story she is telling herself is getting in her way.
Willingness to stand honestly within our story takes guts. Tempting as it
may be to omit chapters with pain, disappointment, and cruelty, doing so
compromises our relationship with ourselves and therefore our relationship
with others, including an intimate partner. Working to create a coherent and
cohesive life story is healing. It also shines a light on negative themes, or
core issues. You will begin to identify your core issues here and continue
the work in later lessons as well. Owning our core issues moves us from
passive to active, from victim to survivor, deepening our capacity to love.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
How you tell the story of your life shapes how you live and how you love. Learn
your old story so you can choose to make it anew.

The Story of Your Life
Create a table of contents for the story
of your life. Ask yourself:

What is the title of your life story?
How will you divide the chapters?

What will you title those chapters?

The intention of this exercise is twofold.
Working with the story of your life in
this way can help you bring to light the
major themes that are at play in your
life. In addition, the very process of
working with your life story creates
narrative coherence, which is healing.
Filling in the Details
As you create your table of contents,
add some detail and richness to it by
answering the following questions:

Who are the major characters? Think of
the people who have stood in your corner
as well as those who have presented you
with battles and challenges.
As you look at your chapter titles and
think about those chapters, what would
you say are the central conflicts or major
themes in your life? For example, you
may notice a pattern of falling down but
getting back up. Or you may notice a
theme of all good things come to an end.
Or you may notice a theme about the
importance of community or the
importance of achievement.

What have been your most impactful
lessons so far? For example, learning to
stand up for yourself in relationships with
authority figures or learning to love again
after a heartbreak.
What are the turning points—times when
something decisively changed for you?
You might not have called it such at the
time, but now when you look back you
may be able to see that life before and life
after are quite different. For example,
quitting smoking or going back to school.
What does that turning point say about
you?
What are your favorite chapters and why?
In what ways have you been blessed?
Take a little time to connect with
yourself: How did it feel to work with
your life story? What surprised you about
the process?

Next Chapters
As the author of your life story, your
voice is everything. This final exercise
will help you become and remain an
empowered author. Select three to five
overarching words or themes that

capture the chapters of your life story so
far. Some themes may be positive
(resilience, setting and reaching goals,
and so forth), but some may be negative,
pointing you to your core issues. Next,
write down three to five words or
themes that you would like to have
capture the upcoming chapters of your
life story—your upcoming chapter
themes. Put these two lists—your core
issues and your upcoming chapter
themes—side by side, and take note of
the changes you are hoping to make. It
might be helpful to frame these changes
as shifts: “Shifting from
________________ to
________________.” If you prefer
images to words, you could paint, draw,
or create a collage that captures what
you would like to bring into your life
going forward.

Lesson 3

Awaken to Your Life Today
Realize deeply that the present moment is all you have. Make the Now
the primary focus of your life.
—Eckhart Tolle

Your story has a past, a present, and a future, but your life is lived in this
moment. As humans, our ability to reflect on the past and dream of the
future is a bit of a double-edged sword. Yes, mental time travel has its
benefits. We can reminisce as a way to feel close to those in our lives, and
we can look ahead in order to make plans and create goals. But there is a
dark side to focusing on the past or the future. It is difficult to feel happy
and connected to others if we are habitually leaving the present moment by
rewinding or fast-forwarding inside our heads. When our thoughts take us
to the past, we tend to experience shame and blame. When our thoughts
take us to the future, we tend to experience anxiety and self-doubt. Living
in the present moment is our best chance for happiness and peace of mind.
And living in the present moment helps us in love.
Living well, with an open heart that is loving of self and loving of
others, requires bringing ourselves, again and again, as fully as possible,
into the present moment—and that means knowing how to work with our
stories. While we need to acknowledge and honor the impact that the past
has on us today, we also need to be careful not to get stuck there. Spiritual
teacher and author Carolyn Myss says, “By remaining stuck in the power of
our wounds, we block our own transformation. We overlook the greater
gifts inherent in our wounds—the strength to overcome them and the
lessons we are meant to receive through them. Wounds teach us to become
passionate and wise” (1997, 15). When you import into the present moment
old, outdated, and inaccurate stories about who you are and how the world
works, there are two unfortunate consequences:

Your intimate relationship is compromised, because your view of
the present moment is being skewed by the past.
You are prevented from honoring the resilience and wisdom that
emerges from pain—resilience and wisdom that in fact can serve
you and your intimate relationship right here, right now.
In this lesson we will talk about how to live in the here and now of your
life by working gently and lovingly with old stories that have a way of
sneaking up on us.

Ghosts from the Past
Leticia and Owen showed up to our weekly therapy session wanting to
rehash yet another explosive fight—a fight in which each of them felt very
much like the victim. Here’s what had happened: Owen had agreed to pick
Leticia’s car up from the mechanic, but he was swamped at work and forgot
to get it. The next morning, when Leticia headed out to the garage, she was
surprised that it wasn’t waiting there for her, and she ended up being late for
an appointment. She called Owen and unleashed her fury. She called him
names, attacked his character (calling him lazy, dishonest, phony, and
worthless), and she threatened to end the relationship. The more she
attacked him, the more he defended himself, and each of them felt hurt,
angry, and deeply misunderstood.
Although Leticia’s upset was certainly understandable, it felt out of
proportion to the situation. I suspected that something else was going on for
her—something from her past—and I very gently said to her, “Leticia, I get
how frustrating this incident with Owen was and is for you. And I can’t get
past this nagging sense that something very old is going on for you.
Something that has nothing to do with the successful and ambitious woman
sitting in this room today and everything to do with the little girl you once
were. In that moment in the garage, when Owen’s forgetfulness
disappointed you so severely, I suspect something much deeper was getting
stirred up in you.”
Tears filled her eyes (and Owen’s eyes, too), and she began to talk about
her past in a way she never had done before. As the only child of a single

mother, she and her mother were extremely close. Her mother was (and is)
hardworking and driven. She was also prone to fits of rage; she would
explode at Leticia’s slightest misstep, calling her names and hitting her.
Leticia never told anyone and maintained a very split view of her mother
(loving mom/angry mom). She had so many reasons not to talk about the
past. She feared it would change Owen’s view of her mother. She feared
Owen might use it against her down the road. She feared it might keep her
from being able to have a relationship with her mother today. But part of
her, a resilient and wise part, knew the past was haunting her.
When Leticia would fly into a rage, Owen felt as though a switch had
flipped, and he was dealing with a different person. And in many ways, he
was. During a fight, it’s as if Leticia “becomes” that terrified little girl and
Owen “becomes” the unpredictable mother. In those moments, Leticia is
living in the past, desperately fighting a ghost, and both of them are lost.
Leticia is lost within an old and painful story, and Owen is lost in confusion
and fear. But her willingness to be vulnerable with him by sharing the past
opened the door to a brand-new, brave, and deep intimacy between them.
He was able to feel and express tremendous empathy for the girl she was.
To him, it was like putting a missing piece into a puzzle.

Embracing Both/And
Leticia needed to let her guard down in order to talk with us about the pain
of her childhood. She trusted Owen enough (although just barely) to share
the truth of her past with him. Also, a part of her was tired of living like
this. Even though she would defend and justify her behavior by blaming
Owen for “making” her mad, she was sick of being triggered so easily, and
her rageful behavior confused and frightened her. Changing this old pattern
is hard work because it means she must face her past and tackle her core
issues.
In order to be able to do what she did in session—in order to take
responsibility for her relational behavior—she had to be able to take a
dialectic approach. Dialectics is the core of a powerful therapeutic
approach created by Dr. Marsha Linehan called dialectical behavior therapy
(2015). Dialetics is a complex concept that has its roots in philosophy and
science, and it involves several assumptions about the nature of reality: 1)

everything is connected to everything else; 2) change is constant and
inevitable; and 3) opposites can be integrated to form a closer
approximation of the truth (which is always evolving). The last point has
particular significance in learning to love bravely. Let’s look at some
examples:
I feel both excited and afraid.
This moment is full of both joy and sadness.
I am both feminine and athletic.
I can be both rational and emotional.
My partner is both whole and a work in progress.
Both my point of view and my partner’s point of view make sense.
Thinking and acting dialectically can be quite difficult to do, downright
impossible at times. The ability to move to this “both/and” thinking is vital
for individual well-being and for relational happiness. Dialectics help us
expand our ways of considering a situation. They can “unstick” conflicts by
reducing blame and increasing flexibility and compassion. For Leticia,
holding the dialectical view—Owen disappointed me and Owen cares
deeply about me—has helped her begin to more effectively handle moments
when pain from the past comes rushing in. In this both/and space, she can
honor her emotions while also honoring the relationship. A dialectical
approach in the face of a conflict does not mean giving up your values or
selling out—it means acknowledging the truth on both sides.
If you find yourself prone to all-or-nothing, good-or-bad, right-or-wrong
thinking, dialectics offer a new way. And when it comes to love, being able
to hold dialectics is key. Nothing on Earth quite compares to the
vulnerability invoked within an intimate relationship. And when we feel
vulnerable, we are at risk of seeking what is simple and concrete in an
attempt to steady ourselves. Black or white, good or bad, right or wrong are
simple and concrete for sure. But they are usually far too narrow to hold the
complexity and paradox of an intimate relationship.

Leticia, in a desperate effort to keep the past in the past, held an
extremely rigid view of who she was—successful, ambitious, determined,
and sure of herself. Her erratic and rage-filled behavior with Owen didn’t fit
within her narrow self-definition, so she did two things:
She pushed those awful moments out of her awareness, acting
minutes later as if it never happened (and insisting Owen do the
same).
She blamed those awful moments on Owen (“I yelled because of his
behavior”).
When Leticia didn’t see her car in the garage, deep feelings of fear and
worthlessness were triggered, or stirred up, within her: “Owen forgot me!”
Without a dialectical approach, the old story was in charge, and her fear
quickly became rage. As she becomes better able to embrace complexity,
she can author a new story: “I feel both angry and sad. Owen loves me and
he forgot to take care of something for me.”
As she courageously named her story of herself and her past, she began
to connect with and honor the terrified girl that she was. She softened and
widened her view of herself, adding complexity and nuance. Her story
became thicker and richer, allowing her to feel both successful, ambitious,
determined, and sure of herself and frightened, needy, and unsure.
Both/and. One does not destroy the other. Ever. One does not lessen the
other. Ever.
Bravery and humility are required in order to say, “My internal world is
complex and mysterious. The experiences in my life reveal new layers of
myself to me. I can look without judgment at what bubbles up within me,
trusting that I can experience the fullness of what it is to be me.” Naming
the old story and connecting to it sets the stage for Leticia to be able to
choose different behaviors in her relationship. She can advocate for herself
and her needs in her relationship with Owen without tearing him to shreds
in the process.

Parenting Yourself from the Inside

Old, rigid, either/or stories don’t stand a chance in the face of complex,
nuanced, juicy stories of the self and of the relationship. Being able to find
an internal both/and space opens up the possibility for self-soothing.
Because how we relate to ourselves determines everything about how we
relate to other people, self-soothing is actually a vital relationship skill. I
like to think of self-soothing as becoming a parent to yourself because when
we soothe ourselves, we offer comfort to ourselves the way a parent offers
comfort to an upset child (Siegel and Hartzel 2013; Fishbane 2013).
Here’s a personal example of self-soothing in the form of parenting
yourself. I was about to give an important talk. It wasn’t my biggest
audience ever, but it was an intimidating one—full of former professors,
colleagues, and strangers. And the topic, spirituality, was a new one for me.
It felt like a big risk, and I was really nervous. On the drive to the venue, I
tried my usual preparation routine of cranking up my favorite Jay-Z song—
the one that gets me in the zone. It did nothing to calm my nerves. I started
to get a little panicky. My heart was racing, I was getting sweaty, and my
hands were clammy. My thoughts were all over the place: What if I freak
out on stage? What if I make a fool of myself?
After a few minutes of running myself ragged, part of me rose above the
fray and was able to see what was happening from a little distance. This
part of me was saying, “These are all stories. These are just old stories. You
don’t need them.” Naming the fact that I was having some stressful
thoughts allowed me to begin to shift from panic to compassion. Next, I
imagined myself as a kid. I literally pictured my round face and thick curly
hair. I imagined talking to my younger self the way a scared kid needs to be
talked to. I validated the girl’s feelings (“You’re scared right now, aren’t
you?”). I imagined giving her a hug and patting her curls. Then I reminded
her that actually she wasn’t the one who was going to stand in front of all
those people. Giving the talk was the job of a woman, not a girl. She could
play or rest or just generally be a kid. I, the woman, would give this talk.
And I, the woman, had everything I needed to get the job done.
Guess what? It worked like a charm. I calmed right down, and I was
able to do what needed to be done. Although this example doesn’t directly
involve my intimate relationship, I assure you that being able to parent
myself from within creates a steady platform from which I can connect to
my partner. The same is true for you.

Awakening to your life today means honoring the fact that you may be
haunted from time to time by old stories that no longer serve you. Naming
those old stories when they impinge on the present moment requires
humility and awareness. Connecting with the impact of those old stories
opens the door to compassion with self. And, most important, turning
inward and attending to the impact of the past on the present moment
facilitates choice. We can remain the victims of our old stories—reactive,
stuck, and narrow—or we can soften, open, and parent ourselves from
within. The latter path adds complexity and nuance to a dried-out old story.
From a both/and place of compassion, intimate connection with others can
flow.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Clarity about the impact of the past on your life today allows you to parent
yourself from the inside—relating to yourself with wisdom and compassion so
that you can love fully in the here and now.

Being Here Now
One of the best ways to get better at
living in the present moment is to
practice mindfulness. Being mindful
simply means bringing your attention to
the present moment without judgment.
As with most things in life, the more we
practice, the better we get! You may
find it helpful to take several two- or
three-minute mindfulness breaks
throughout the day, for example when
you sit down to a meal, when you park
your car at work in the morning, and/or
when you are in the shower. Or you
might enjoy doing one longer daily
mindfulness meditation. There are lots

of great books, audio recordings, and
apps devoted to teaching mindfulness.
Here are some tips:

Sit comfortably.
As you sit, still and quiet, scan your body,
bringing your attention to each part of
your body, from head to toes. Take note
of the various sensations you are
experiencing.
Focus on your breath, noticing how it
feels in your nose, mouth, chest, and
belly.
As thoughts bounce around inside your
head, return your focus to your breath. I
find it helpful to imagine that my presentmoment awareness is a blue sky and each
thought inside my head is a cloud. When
a thought comes in, I note it and allow it
to pass on by like the cloud, as I return
my attention to the sky—my presentmoment awareness of my breath. You will
probably need to do this over and over
again.

Mindfulness meditation takes practice,
but the benefits to your physical and
emotional well-being—as well as your
romantic relationship—are worth it!

Parenting Yourself Today
Find a place in your home to post a
photo of yourself as a child. Having that
photo in view can serve as a reminder to
relate to yourself with compassion.
When you notice yourself engaging in
unhelpful and unkind stories about who
you are (“You can’t do anything right!
No wonder you are single. You are fat,
lazy, weak!”), look at that photo and
imagine talking to your younger self in
that way. You wouldn’t, would you?
Ask yourself, “What does that kid need
to hear instead?”

Lesson 4

Forge a New Connection
When you parent, it’s crucial you realize you aren’t raising a “minime,” but a spirit throbbing with its own signature.
—Shefali Tsabary

From the moment we are born until we take our last breath, we are always
changing, yet it is easy for us to retain a perspective of our parents or
caregivers that we created when we were kids. Clinging to an old story of
who they are can negatively affect your love life. Through the lens of an
out-of-date story, your parents are stuck in the past, and, more important,
you are stuck in the past. It is important to “grow up” your relationship with
your parents and to get to know them as the people they are today. And to
get to know them as the person you are today. Forging a mature adult
relationship with your parents is essential because an outdated story can
keep you from making healthy choices in your intimate relationships.

Fresh Data
We know that the past has a huge impact on our love lives, and we know
there is a strong connection between our original love template (the
relationship models we saw when we were growing up) and our intimate
relationships today. Therefore, this entire lesson is devoted to helping you
love more consciously by collecting fresh data. In other words, you are
being invited and encouraged to talk about love with the people who raised
you. The intention of talking to your parents is threefold:
It will help you more deeply understand your love template.
It will help you better understand who they are today and how that is
different from who they were when you were young.

It will help them get to know you as you are today.
Regardless of your age or relationship status, the process of seeking
fresh data from your parents and offering fresh data to your parents about
your life will grow relational self-awareness.
I believe in this so much that in both of the courses I teach, I have my
students do it! We call it a parent interview. The transformation that comes
from this assignment is unlike anything else in my teaching. Even though
this assignment often invokes a full spectrum of reactions from enthusiasm
and curiosity to fear and dread, year after year students inevitably come
away from the experience feeling grateful, optimistic, and loving. Most
important, students tend to feel a degree of freedom that had been
previously unimaginable. This kind of dialogue tends to clarify boundaries,
helping parents and adult kids feel both separate from each other and
connected to each other.
Even though we have moved into adulthood, it is often the case that
parts of us remain stuck in childhood in a sort of emotional time warp. The
parts of us that are stuck in childhood are likely to be exemplified by certain
behaviors:
Seeking permission from our parents
Seeking direction from our parents
Seeking validation from our parents
Wanting to save or rescue our parents
If these behaviors are running the show, our choices around intimate
relationships will be guided by unhealed and unacknowledged stuff from
the past.
Here’s an example from one of my students. Trina was raised in a
conservative, Southern Baptist family. Her grandmother and mother would
tell her stories about girls and women from the community (ones Trina
didn’t know) who “went and got themselves pregnant.” In a variety of
ways, Trina was taught that men were not to be trusted and that sex was

dangerous. She listened. At twenty-two years old, she had never gone on a
date or kissed a guy, and she felt very afraid of getting close to anyone.
Before Trina interviewed her mother, she said that she couldn’t see the
possibility for dating or love. During the parent interview, however, Trina’s
mother let her know that she had had sex outside of her marriage to Trina’s
father. Trina was shocked! Trina’s mother, too, was surprised to find out
that Trina felt so ambivalent about love, and she said to her, “I hope you
take a chance with love. I hope you find someone you feel really happy
with, someone who cares about you.”
Trina came away from the interview feeling more confused than ever.
But she also came away with a sense of freedom. Rather than the absolute
truth, Trina began to see her mother and grandmother’s old messages to her
as fear-based and extreme. Instead of a black-and-white view that “good
women don’t” and “bad women do,” she began to see shades of gray: her
mother is self-respecting, measured, and wise, and she explored her
sexuality outside of marriage. Trina began to look at how her rigid views
were on one hand keeping her safe but on the other hand keeping her stuck.
After the interview, Trina told me, “Falling in love is still somewhat
frightening, but now it also feels intriguing.” Notice that dialectic—both
frightening and intriguing! Talking to her mother woman-to-woman gave
Trina the opportunity to gather fresh data—to “grow up” her relationship
with her mother. The story that Trina had been telling herself about her
mother’s views on love turned out to be out-of-date and inaccurate. More
important, talking to her mother helped Trina realize that it is now time for
Trina to make choices that suit her needs and her desires instead of
someone else’s. Is it time for you to gather some fresh data of your own?

Guidelines for Your Loving Update
If you decide to take the step of talking with your parents in the service of
“growing up” your relationship with them, there are some conversation
starters at the end of this lesson. You can download the “Guide to Your
Loving Update” (at http://www.newharbinger.com/35814), which
summarizes the entire process. Before you dive in, here’s what I invite you
to keep in mind:

Establish your boundaries before you have the conversation with
your parents. The intention of a “loving update” (Fishbane 2013) is
to expand your relational self-awareness in order to help you
proactively make intimate relationship choices from a place of
clarity rather than reactively from a place of woundedness. The
intention of this dialogue is not to give parents a place to confess
family secrets that might end up feeling like a burden to you. Make
your boundaries clear at the outset by saying something like, “I am
not particularly interested in you sharing with me any secrets,
especially ones about your relationship with my other parent.”
Not all parents are available for this kind of work. For instance,
people who are active in an addiction, ensnared in an abusive
relationship, or dealing with an untreated mental illness tend to be
unable to connect authentically with anyone, including their adult
children. Of course, there are exceptions to every rule, and I have
seen parents generously try to show up for their adult child despite
limitations like these.
You don’t need to be the family therapist. The intention of this
dialogue is not to put you in the position of attempting to fix, save,
or rescue your parents. This is an exercise in being, not doing. Be
careful about coming away from this conversation with a to-do list
(for example, “call my aunt and talk with her about my father,”
“send my mom some books about addiction,” or “talk with my
brother about how worried our parents are about him”). After the
dialogue, if you are asking yourself questions like, “How can I get
my mom to… ?” I invite you to view these questions as a red flag of
sorts. It is most likely an indication that you are overfunctioning—
working too hard on business that does not belong to you. Perhaps it
is an old pattern for you to feel responsible for everyone’s problems.
If this happens, I suggest that you engage in our Name-ConnectChoose process. Name this pattern (“I notice that I am shifting into
rescue mode”). Connect with whatever feelings are attached with
the urge to fix and rescue—allowing yourself to feel sad and angry,
for example—instead of reactively acting on those feelings. From
that emotionally connected place, you will perhaps choose a

different route—one that does not entangle you in your parents’
problems. Instead of rescuing, you could say, “Mom, I love you very
much, and I sincerely hope that you will…”
Avoid going into the conversation with an “ax to grind.” For
example, if your father never acknowledged the eating disorder you
battled as a teen, you might be hoping he will do so in this
conversation. If this is the case, you will want to do two things.
First, verbalize it to him: “Dad, I am aware that I am seeking
validation about the bulimia I struggled with as a teen. I am not sure
whether and how we will talk about that, but I want you to know
that that desire is present with me today.” Second, parent yourself
around this, consciously validating for yourself what you endured. If
that younger part of you feels soothed ahead of time, that part is less
likely to become reactive and take over when you are with your dad.
This conversation will go best if you can enter it like a reporter or an
anthropologist. In other words, try to find a stance that is
nonjudgmental and curious, and lead with an open heart and an open
mind.
Explore your trepidation. If the prospect of sitting down with your
parents fills you with anxiety, it is worth understanding that feeling.
As you sit with the feeling, notice where you feel it in your body.
What does the nervousness feel like? What is the feeling saying?
What are the thoughts that swirl around as you imagine this
conversation? As you explore and honor your anxiety, it may lessen,
allowing you to initiate a dialogue. Or you may decide that your
anxiety is letting you know that now is not the time for a
conversation like this.
Honor the process. After your dialogue, you may find yourself
experiencing a variety of emotions. I encourage you to allow
yourself to be present with whatever feelings are stirred up within
you rather than pushing them away and moving on to something
else. You may cry during or after the conversation. I invite you to
trust that tears have a wonderful healing quality, and your tears may
also reveal new insights to you. After you talk with your parents, I

encourage you to do something that makes you feel good, calm, and
safe, such as taking a hot bath, walking, or journaling.

Possible Outcomes
There are many possible outcomes from this experience, but here are some
common revelations that my students have shared with me over the years:
My parents are happier in their relationship than I ever thought they
were. I feel relieved about this.
I feel less responsible for my parents’ unhappiness. I can see how
their choices led them to where they are today. I can see their
problems are older than I am, and I really can feel that their
problems are not mine to fix.
I am really afraid of infidelity because it happened in my family. I
am still scared, but my parents shared their story with me, and at
least now I understand that it didn’t just happen out of the blue. It
still hurts but at least it makes more sense. (Remember that in lesson
2 we talked about how stories that are more coherent and cohesive
are less problematic and painful.)
There is no such thing as a perfect relationship or marriage. I knew
that in my head, but talking with my parents helped me feel that
more deeply. Rather than that feeling scary to me, it just feels more
okay now.
For years, I have blamed my parents for problems and difficulties in
my life. Talking to them adult to adult puts a little more distance
between us, and I am able to feel more compassion for who they are
as people. I need to be responsible for my life.

Deepening Compassion

Some people find it quite liberating to view a parent as their grandparents’
child (Fishbane 2013). Viewing a parent in this way can open the door to
feelings of compassion for your parent’s struggles and limitations, helping
you find a space beyond blame. It is important to note that holding
compassion for your parent’s story is not intended to excuse or condone
behavior that caused you pain. Holding compassion for your parent’s story
is also not intended to be a bypass or a way of avoiding uncomfortable
emotions like anger and sadness.
Being aware of how unhealthy patterns were transmitted from
generation to generation—from your grandparents to your parent—adds
thickness and context to your story. It provides you with a frame for your
own healing and your efforts to transform old patterns so that you can love
well in the here and now. And remember that this shift in perspective is
available to you even if your parent is no longer alive.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Forging an adult-to-adult relationship with your parents is a possible, necessary,
and brave step toward healthy choices in your intimate relationship.

The work in this lesson is for you to
seek a “loving update” with one or more
of the people who raised you.
Before
Ask your parents if they would be
willing to participate in a dialogue with
you, and give yourself some time to
prepare. Your preparation may include
visualizing how you want to think, feel,
and act during the dialogue. Imagine
yourself in the situation thinking,
feeling, and acting in a way that feels

wholehearted. Set an intention for
yourself for the experience: curiosity,
neutrality, connection, love, clarity, and
growth are all good options.
During
Consider having a pen and paper with
you during the conversation so that you
can jot down information for later
reflection. Or ask if you can record it.
Let your parent know that it is his or her
choice to answer or not answer any
question that you ask. Let your parent
know that either of you can ask for a
break if one is wanted or needed. If you
find yourself feeling emotionally
overwhelmed—really angry or really
sad—take a break. Find a quiet spot and
take some deep breaths. You may
consider having this dialogue over the
course of several meetings.
Questions to Ask

Begin by asking your parent to tell you
the story of his or her intimate
relationship or relationships. Have your
parent start by creating a verbal table of
contents. Say: “Imagine your life as a
story. Break the story into chapters.
What would those chapters be called?
What would the story of that chapter
be?” As the story unfolds, you might ask
follow-up questions:

What have you learned about dating?
What have you learned about marriage?
What have you learned about love?
What have you learned about handling
differences and managing conflict in a
relationship?
What was your marriage like when I was
a kid versus today?
What do you feel are the essential
ingredients in a healthy intimate
relationship?
What is your life like today?
What are your passions?
What are you happy about?
What would you like me to know about
you?
What do you want for me in my intimate
relationship?

How do you see me as an intimate
partner?
What do you think I’ve learned from you
about being in an intimate relationship?

Information to Share

Now it’s your turn to bravely share
details about your present-day life:

Here’s what I would like you to know
about my life today…
Here’s what I am struggling with…
Here’s some work that I am doing on
myself right now…
Here’s what I want and need from you
these days…
Here are some of my hopes for my
future…

After
Immediately after the update, take some
time for self-care. Consider taking a

walk, watching TV, taking a hot bath,
calling a friend, or doing whatever gives
you some peaceful downtime. Then,
take some time to journal about your
experience, responding to these
questions:

What was the high point of the dialogue
for you?
What was the low point of the dialogue
for you?
What was most surprising?
What does your parent see in you that you
do not see (or that you see differently)?
What (if anything) about your parent’s
life compromised his or her ability to
parent you?
Explore glimpses of compassion that you
feel for your parent.
What can you see in your parent today as
an adult that you could not see when you
were a child?
As an adult, do you see his or her
mistakes, flaws, or shortcomings in a

different light than you did when you
were younger?
How can thinking of your parent with
compassion bring more peace to your
life?

Lesson 5

Establish Healthy Boundaries
Daring to set boundaries is about having the courage to love ourselves,
even when we risk disappointing others.
—Brené Brown

Yuko and Isaac showed up for their first postwedding couples therapy
session eager to share, and I was eager to listen. Amid the stories about the
cake, the vows, and the honeymoon, Isaac told a story that stood out.
He said, “All day long, I was aware that my father was focusing on the
things that weren’t going ‘right’—the rain, the photographer running late,
some last-minute schedule changes. Then I bumped into him in the men’s
room at some point, and he said straight up, ‘This is the worst wedding I
have ever been to.’ I put my hand on his shoulder and said, ‘I’m sorry you
feel that way. I’m having the time of my life.’ Can you believe it? I was so
proud of myself!”
Yuko chimed in, “I am so impressed with how he handled that! I could
easily imagine a comment like that turning Isaac into a puddle. We’ve had
that happen so many times before. His dad is critical, and I’m the one who
pays the price. Suddenly, according to Isaac, everything about our life is
wrong. Everything about me is wrong. It’s awful when that happens. I was
so relieved and delighted that he let his dad’s words roll off his shoulders.”
I was also delighted! Isaac had grown really tired of carrying the weight
of his father’s judgment, and he was beginning to choose a different path.
He was clear that internalizing his father’s harsh voice compromised his
relationship with himself, and it compromised his relationship with Yuko.
Isaac had worked hard to establish boundaries in his relationship with his
father, and that hard work was paying off! Most impressive about Isaac’s
story was that he found a way to meet his father’s remark with boundaries
and love. He neither absorbed his father’s words, letting them turn him to
mush, nor pushed his father away by either retreating from him or raging at

him. He felt both loving toward and separate from his father. Wow! Those
are some healthy boundaries!

Where You and I Meet
Boundaries are the space between “you” and “not-you.” Boundaries mark
the space at which interactions occur between you and the people in your
world. You can’t see or touch boundaries, but they are always there.
We have a built-in sense of our physical boundaries, and that sense
determines all kinds of behaviors, from how close we stand when we are
talking to whether, when, and how we hug. We also have emotional
boundaries that determine how much we share with others about ourselves
and when. Our emotional boundaries dictate the kind of behavior we invite,
tolerate, encourage, and reject from others. Being able to effectively
navigate the boundary between self and other requires self-awareness and
courage.
Relationships are a dance, and points of contact (boundaries) are always
ripe with opportunities for flow or friction. Nothing is static. “I want more
closeness.” “I need some space.” “That’s too much.” “Give me more.”
“Help me.” “I’ve got this.” Boundaries are anything but black-and-white.
They are contextual, relational, and ever-changing. Therefore, the best we
can ever hope to do in a relationship is grant each other space in which each
person can state: “Hey, you’re in too close.” Or “Where are you? I can’t feel
you.” Relationships in which this kind of feedback can occur are brave—
and intimate—indeed!
If you can’t give your partner that kind feedback—because you can’t
speak it or because he or she can’t hear it—the relationship is guided by
fear, not love. By contrast, love thrives when boundaries are consciously
negotiated and renegotiated in the imperfect and dynamic flow of questions
and curiosity and trying again.
I once heard an addictions specialist use a phrase that really stuck with
me: Say what you mean, mean what you say, but don’t say it in a mean way.
When we are able to align what we feel on the inside with the words we
speak to ourselves and to others, we can create and maintain healthy
boundaries. Doing this is truly the work of a lifetime. And it is vital work.

Healthy relationships require authenticity—to oneself and to another. Isaac
will never be able to control how his father feels or what he says, but Isaac
does have control over his reactions to his father’s words. His commitment
to creating a boundary by speaking his truth in the face of his father’s
judgment helps him—and it helps his marriage.
Although several forthcoming lessons will invite you to look at how you
manage boundaries in romantic relationships, we will focus first on
boundaries between you and members of your family, because it can be
easy to underestimate the impact that family boundaries have on your love
life. This is true for people who are single, dating, or married. A review of
this material is available online at http://www.newharbinger.com/35814.

Energy In, Energy Out
We know that a boundary is the point of contact between two people, so
imagine that when two people are together, energy is flowing within each of
them and also between the two of them. When boundaries are healthy, you
maintain the energy that is yours and your partner maintains the energy that
is his or hers. Both of you are able to feel connected to each other and
separate from each other. Boundaries are unhealthy when they are too
porous or too rigid.
Let’s break these unhealthy boundaries down:
Input

Output

Healthy
Boundary
(Connected
and Protected)

We connect with others
while holding on to ourselves.

We express our opinions and perspectives
while respecting the views and voices of others.

Porous
Boundary
(Connected
but
not
Protected)

We absorb or take on that
which is not ours.

We intrude into that which is not ours.

Rigid
Boundary
(Protected
but
not
Connected)

Input

Output

We block the input of
others.

We restrain or hold ourselves back from
others.

Porous Boundaries
Porous boundaries mean that we are connected but not protected.
Perhaps we are too wide open to the input of others, losing ourselves in
efforts to please and placate. Or, we are meddling in stuff that isn’t our
business.
ABSORBING

Are there relational moments in which you feel overly responsible—to
fix, to heal, to compensate for? When you take on that which is not yours,
you allow yourself to be drained, with others taking what you have not
lovingly given. If Isaac had absorbed his father’s comment, it would likely
have altered his entire wedding day, leading him to scramble to try to please
him. His wedding day story would have been about how his dad ruined
everything, and he would have become the victim of his father’s judgment.
Instead Isaac managed his boundary. He did not absorb his father’s
comment, refusing to take on something that he knew was not his. His
father’s words were a reflection of his father’s story, which was ultimately
neither Isaac’s business nor his concern. This whole notion that we do not
need to take on another person’s story as our own is not easy, but it is
simple.
INTRUDING

Do you intrude into spaces where you are not wanted or needed—
inserting yourself, ignoring feedback, demanding what hasn’t been given in
love? For me, I know that I’m violating the boundaries of someone else
when I catch myself saying or thinking, “But I’m just trying to help.” When
invited, being of service to someone at a time of need can be powerfully
compassionate and intimate, but sometimes we just slip into someone else’s

business. Sometimes as an escape or a distraction from our own business!
One of my dear friends says, “How full of me to be so full of you!”
I can imagine Yuko facing this risk in the aftermath of her father-inlaw’s comment. If she begins to act on Isaac’s behalf, confronting his father
or insisting that Isaac keep his distance from him, she’s exiting her own
business and taking residence in Isaac’s. “I’m just trying to help” usually
comes from a loving place. Perhaps Isaac will enlist her help or feel grateful
if she offers, but any intervention must be guided by a conversation
between Isaac and Yuko. Connecting with someone’s pain while staying in
your own business is hard to do! It is difficult to see people we care about in
pain, but don’t underestimate the power of bearing witness, without agenda,
to the pain of another. When we bear witness without trying to fix, we
create connection while practicing healthy boundaries.
Rigid Boundaries
Rigid boundaries mean that we are protected but not connected. Perhaps
we are cut off from the input of others, refusing to be influenced or swayed.
Or maybe we are shut down and struggling to open ourselves or express
what is inside us.
BLOCKING

In some of your relationships, do you feel vigilant, on guard, and afraid
of being ambushed? When our boundaries are rigid, we may find ourselves
refusing to let in the input of others, usually for fear of being attacked. We
feel brittle, edgy, and defensive…and we probably come across that way
too. If Isaac’s boundaries had been rigid in that moment with his father, he
likely would have fought back, expressing some version of, “Screw you,
Dad!” In this stance, instead of trusting ourselves to let in, “metabolize,”
and let go of other people’s energy, we block everything.
RESTRAINING

If those around you say you feel hard to reach or complain that you
don’t open up, it might be that you rigidly hold yourself back from selfexpression. Perhaps you keep a tight rein on self-expression because you
learned early on that it wasn’t safe to give voice to your feelings.
Sometimes we get stuck holding tightly to an old way of coping, long after

it has served its original purpose. Healthy relational boundaries mean letting
others know how their words or actions make us feel. Restraining ourselves
from sharing our internal world with other people can leave us feeling
resentful and devitalized.

Fences
Committing to an intimate relationship involves creating a we. In order to
become a member of that we, each partner has to transform his or her
relationship with the family he or she grew up in. As we know from earlier
lessons in this book, the goal is to feel both separate from and connected to
our family of origin. This process of becoming separate from while staying
connected to is called differentiation, and it tends to happen over time.
If you remain too wrapped up in the family you came from, your partner
will feel that your loyalty has not transferred over to the new family you are
creating together. But at the other extreme, if you are too cut off from the
people who raised you, your intimate relationship may feel isolated and
disconnected from your community, your heritage, your lineage. Being in
love can help you feel more differentiated from your family of origin, as
you begin to create your own couple-specific traditions and rituals. It is also
the case that in order to be in love, you need to be at least somewhat
differentiated from the family you grew up in. Otherwise, family needs and
expectations will prevent the intimate relationship from getting off the
ground.
So what would be just about right? My friend and mentor (and foreword
writer) Dr. Mona Fishbane uses the metaphor of a picket fence to capture
the boundary that is needed between adult kids and their parents (2013).
Each generation is on its own side of the fence, yet they can see and feel
each other. Connection is possible, but what happens on one side of the
fence doesn’t need to be the other person’s business. The picket-fence
image captures the heart of differentiation—we are separate from each other
but we are also connected to each other. We can enjoy each other’s
company while enjoying our boundaries as well.

Culture

This all sounds perfectly nice in theory, but, in the real world, couples
spend a lot of time and energy figuring out (and fighting about) how to
navigate boundaries. That’s because in between the extremes of total
separateness and total connection are many shades of gray, and what feels
to me like just the right mix might feel awful to you. How we manage our
boundaries is profoundly impacted by culture.
Cultural factors like race, ethnicity, religion, and geographic region
shape how we interact with each other. Culture dictates (implicitly and
explicitly) what’s “normal,” “healthy,” and “acceptable.” What might look
extreme in one culture may be common and not problematic in another
culture. For example, research indicates that Greek and Italian couples
touch each other more when they are interacting than do English, French,
and Dutch couples (Lyubomirsky 2013). A colleague of mine used to say
that the closer you get to the equator, the more the weather heats up and the
more the people “heat up” in terms of personality, emotionality, and desire
for closeness. Sweeping generalization? Yes. Some truth? Yes. Culture
dictates how we “do” boundaries.
When two people come together across cultural differences, relational
self-awareness is their best guide to figuring out how to handle the bridging
of different worlds. Imagine, for example, that a Caucasian American
woman has dinner for the first time with her Chinese American boyfriend’s
family. To her, the atmosphere feels uncomfortably formal, and she is struck
by how much deference her boyfriend shows to his parents. The boundaries
feel way too rigid to her. On the flip side, when he is with her family, he
feels uncomfortable with the casual atmosphere, which he interprets as
disrespectful. The boundaries feel too porous to him. His desire to please
and accommodate his parents feels dutiful to him, but she feels abandoned
by what she perceives as him putting them before her. Her playful approach
with her parents feels like an expression of love to her, but he feels like an
outsider.
Without relational self-awareness, they are likely to turn these cultural
differences into judgments, each labeling their own family’s way to be the
better way and the other family’s way to be the worse way. With relational
self-awareness, they can name their reactions. He can say, “When I am with
your family, here’s how I start to feel…” From a place of curiosity instead

of judgment, they can together weave a story of how their love is big
enough and strong enough to hold these cultural differences.

Boundaries in Action
Maria is thirty-two years old and actively dating. She and her mother are
very close, so her pattern has been to go on a date and then call her mom to
“debrief.” Her mother has lots of opinions and is not afraid to express them:
“An accountant? Boring!” “Shorter than you? Are you serious?!” “Split the
bill? Come on!” In Maria’s gut, she feels troubled by this, knowing the
boundary between them is too porous. She’s absorbing too much. Her
mom’s voice plays inside her head, shaping her experience of these men.
However, she feels afraid to speak up, worried that her mom will feel
offended and hurt.
Knowing that it’s time to make a change, she first allows herself to
name this pattern (“In my family, asking for a firmer boundary feels like a
betrayal”). She allows herself to connect with all the feelings she has about
this old story. Maria feels sad that it’s so hard for her to stand up for herself,
and she feels angry that it’s so hard for her mother to trust that Maria can
love her and also need some distance from her. She decides it’s time to
choose something new and plans to keep the details of her dates to herself,
at least until she is able to hear her own voice loud and clear. Now, if her
mother asks about a recent date, Maria simply says, “Thank you for asking.
I don’t really have anything to share right now.” That’s an example of say
what you mean, mean what you say, but don’t say it in a mean way.
After trying that a few times, Maria decides to let her mother know
about the insight she has had and the new choice she is making. She tells
her, “Mom, I have become aware that when I share details about my first
dates, I find myself really swayed by your opinions and perspective. It
makes it harder for me to discern my own feelings about this new
relationship. I appreciate your interest, but I am going to hold back from
talking about my dating life with you for a while and see how that feels for
me.” Renegotiating this boundary led to a gentler and more compassionate
dialogue between Maria and her mother in a few other arenas as well. Maria
feels more able to vulnerably share stories from her world, knowing that she
can trust herself to advocate on her own behalf if needed.

As Gandhi said, “Happiness is when what you think, what you say, and
what you do are in harmony.” Learning to create and maintain healthy
boundaries is the work of a lifetime. The payoff is so worthwhile:
relationships that invite and demand authenticity and integrity.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Intimate relationships are shaped by the past as well as by the here-and-now
relationship that you have with the people who raised you. Healthy boundaries
honor both autonomy and connection, allowing you to enjoy your intimate
relationship without guilt, fear, or shame.

Boundary Matters
Complete the table below to help you
reflect on how you tend to manage
boundaries in your relationships. You
can also find this table online at
http://www.newharbinger.com/35814.

With whom do you have this type of
boundary?

Type of Boundary
Healthy boundary

Absorbing
Boundary)

(Porous

Input

Intruding
Boundary)

(Porous

Output

Blocking
Boundary)

(Rigid

Input

Example of this boundary in
action

With whom do you have this type of
boundary?

Type of Boundary
Restraining
Boundary)

(Rigid

Example of this boundary in
action

Output

Analyze the Data
In order to better understand how you
manage relational boundaries, answer
the following questions about your
“Boundary Matters” table:

What patterns did you notice as you
completed the table? Do your boundaries
tend to be healthier in some relationships
than others (friends versus family versus
intimate relationships)?
Is there one kind of unhealthy boundary
that you seem to tend toward?

Reflect on a specific example of an
unhealthy relationship boundary from
your “Boundary Matters” table.

Write a little about the specific incident
that captures the unhealthy nature of that
boundary. What happened before, during,
and after?

What made it difficult for you to manage
a healthy boundary in that situation (for
example, fear of hurting the other
person’s feelings, anxiety, feeling
powerless)?
At what point did you realize the
boundary was unhealthy? What helped
you see that?
Does this incident remind you of patterns
in your family of origin? In what way?
Looking back on this incident, what do
you wish you would have done
differently?
If this situation happens again in the
future, how do you want to handle it?

Love and Family
Think about whether differences in
family boundaries have been a problem
in your intimate relationships. For
example, “My family talks on the phone
once a month; her family talks on the
phone every day.” Answer the following
questions:

To what extent have you found yourself
judging the relationship that your intimate
partner has with his or her family,
especially in terms of boundary
management?
What is it specifically that triggers or
upsets you about this dynamic?
What do you come to believe about your
partner when confronted with this kind of
difference in your intimate relationship?
About yourself?

Journal about what would need to shift
within you so that you could view this
as a difference between your families
versus “my family is good, right, and
normal, and your family is bad, wrong,
and abnormal.”

Part 2

Self-Awareness

Lesson 6

Embrace Your Unique Love Truths
A human being is a part of the whole called by us universe, a part
limited in time and space.
—Albert Einstein

As Spanish philosopher José Ortega y Gasset said: “I am I plus my
circumstances.” In earlier lessons, we explored the “circumstances” of our
family stories about love, but it is also the case that the circumstances of our
zeitgeist—the place and time in which we live—also shape how we feel
about ourselves and our intimate relationships. For example, an unmarried
twenty-five-year-old woman in the United States in the 1920s would likely
have been in a full-blown panic (or at least her parents would have been)
about her marital status. Today, it is normal to be twenty-five and single.
Our culture sends us messages about who and when and how to love—
messages that shape how we feel within our skin, how we make choices
about intimate relationships, and how we feel about those choices. Many of
us are blindly guided by sweeping cultural “shoulds.” But when we are able
to name how cultural messages and stories live within, we open up new
possibilities for how we feel and how we relate to our intimate partners.
When we are able to discern where and when and how cultural stories mesh
with our own deep truth, we put ourselves in charge of our love life. But
that’s easier said than done because our culture is the air we breathe day in
and day out, seeping into our pores without us even noticing. The goal isn’t
to escape our cultural context. Because consciousness facilitates choice, the
goal instead is to decide whether a particular cultural message limits us or
supports us. Nowhere are these external voices louder than around our
shared cultural stories about autonomy versus connection and about gender
norms.

“I” and “We”
The desire to love and be loved is woven into our DNA. Connection is our
default setting. But it’s not quite that simple, is it? In addition to connection,
most of us crave solitude, independence, and freedom. When the desire for
connection competes with the desire for autonomy, we can end up feeling
lost and anxious, asking questions like:
How do I balance wanting to be in a relationship with wanting to
have “my own life?”
Why do I want to be in a relationship only until I am in one—and
then I can only think of what I’m missing out on?
How do I blend my life with someone else’s without losing myself?
There’s no doubt that navigating these seemingly opposing forces—the
desire for connection and the desire for autonomy—is easier when we trust
what is inside of us. In order to trust what is within, we need to first name
the external messages that we take in about how connected or autonomous
we “should” be. Then, we need to connect with the impact that those
messages have on us. It is only when we have identified these external
messages and figured out how we feel about them that we are freed up to
choose a path that make us feel good, authentic, and whole.
American culture prizes independence. Sociologists classify cultures on
a spectrum from valuing the individual (individualistic) to valuing the
community (collectivistic), and the United States falls squarely on the
individualistic end of that spectrum. In contrast, Asian, South American,
and African countries tend to fall more toward the collectivistic end of the
spectrum. A student of mine who spent her early years in a collectivistic
culture and immigrated to the United States as a teen explained to me that
when she thinks of her “self,” she thinks of her family. Her sense of self is
inextricably and deeply bound to her family unit. When faced with
decisions, she thinks primarily of the impact of her choices on her family
and is guided by that.
Of course, people born and raised in the United States factor in others
and feel a sense of loyalty to family, but we value standing on our own two

feet and being our own person. This makes perfect sense since the United
States was formed in order to escape the control and domination of
England. Life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. It’s right there! We
prize freedom and the ability to chart our own course. Do I believe that the
words of the US Constitution play in our heads as we are falling in love?
No. Do I believe that growing up in an individualistic culture affects our
choices in our intimate relationship? Yes.
Clients and students often express worry that falling in love means
risking “losing myself”—a concern that makes sense in the context of an
individualistic culture. Valuing individualism can make us feel squeamish
about the fact that falling in love means becoming dependent on another
person—emotionally, pragmatically, and financially. The dependence, or
really, interdependence, goes in both directions. Love requires the
cocreation of a we—something bigger than the two individuals. The we has
needs different from the needs of either individual. The we must be nurtured
and tended. And the we provides benefits: comfort, a home base, and shared
resources.

Doing Gender
If we want to bravely and humbly honor both the need for closeness and the
need for independence, we must peek through the gender lens.
Traditionally, we talk about women as sitting on the commitment-craving
end of the spectrum and men hanging out on the commitment-phobic end of
the spectrum. While this is certainly a sweeping generalization, it does
reflect our cultural stories about masculinity and femininity. This concept
could be an entire book unto itself, so I will just offer a simple (and silly)
example of how we “load” masculinity with independence/autonomy and
we “load” femininity with dependence/connection. Walk the aisles of your
local costume store in October, and you are sure to find a bride costume
designed for a girl to wear. But I would bet you any amount of money that
you will not find a groom costume designed for a boy to wear.
From the first days of their lives, boys are flooded with stories that
encourage them (more like force them) to be independent, to stand on their
own two feet. “Don’t cry.” “Man up.” “Don’t back down.” Think about the
words that are used to shame a boy or a man for showing vulnerability,

dependence, or need: “sissy” and “girly” (there are more graphic ones, but
I’ll leave it there…). These gender-loaded words encourage
hypermasculinity and degrade that which is associated with femininity:
softness, connection, dependence.
Times are changing. Our continued efforts to embrace people whose
sexualities and gender identities have been marginalized and oppressed
serve all of us. The degree to which each of us can embrace all of the
manifestations of what we call masculine and feminine is the degree to
which we can live with increasing authenticity and integrity. Strict gender
binaries relegate us to being “half-humans.” In fact, the mere act of labeling
desires, thoughts, and behaviors as being either “masculine” or “feminine”
puts us into boxes that just don’t fit. We need and deserve access to the full
spectrum of human experience.
We all yearn for power and control. We all have the potential to be
aggressive and violent. We all have longings to nurture and care for others.
We all crave intimacy and closeness. These are all part of the human
experience. And…there’s nothing like an intimate relationship to bring each
and every one of these longings out in full force! In order to create a
sustaining and happy intimate partnership, you must be able to embrace all
of your so-called “masculine” energy and your so-called “feminine” energy.
And you also must be willing to tolerate, accept, and embrace the same in
your partner. When you find yourself falling back on a cultural gender
story, be willing to look inside and ask yourself what is getting triggered—
stirred up—in you. Do any of these prompts sound familiar?
“A real man doesn’t…”
“What kind of wife…”
“As a man, you should…”
“Women are so…”
It’s helpful to view that language as a little red flag and then ask
yourself:
What do I feel in my body?

What is upsetting me right now? What am I afraid of?
What am I desiring right now?
Whose gender story is this? To what degree is it serving me and my
relationship right now? To what degree is it constraining or limiting
me and my relationship right now?
We are most at risk of using a narrow gender (ex. As a man, you
should…) story when we feel scared, alone, and/or hurt in a relationship. It
is usually an effort to make the other person behave differently so that we
can feel better (less anxious, less vulnerable, more in control). Connection
deepens when partners commit to finding, again and again, a space beyond
simple, thin, and ill-fitting stories about who people should be based on the
bodies they occupy.
Self-awareness about gender stories is as important for people in the
LGBTQ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer) community as it is
for those who identify as heterosexual. Each of us has a relationship to
masculinity and femininity, because our culture is gendered. In order to love
deeply and bravely, we need to be (and deserve to be) conscious of our
gender stories regardless of whether we look, feel, identify, and behave in
ways that are masculine, feminine, both, or neither.

Playing with Energy
I took us right to the dark side of cultural gender stories—how we use ideas
about what masculinity and femininity “should be” to protect ourselves
when we feel unsafe and unsettled in our intimate relationships. But cultural
gender stories can elevate and connect us, too. Taking pride in how you
manifest your masculinity or femininity can be a potent source of selfesteem (for example, feeling sexy in a dress that accentuates your curves or
feeling more handsome with a beard). Elements of masculinity and
femininity shape the attraction between partners (for example, being drawn
in by those curves or that facial hair).
Willingness to look at the subtle and not-so-subtle ways that masculinity
and femininity show up in your relationship opens the door to freedom and

flexibility. Use masculinity and femininity where and when it serves
connection to self and connection to other. Find a space beyond masculinity
and femininity when gender stories are putting you or your partner in a box.
A heterosexual female student shared that she loves holding her boyfriend
(being the big spoon)…until she panics that it means she’s too “manly” and
he’s too “girly.” When she shared this, I felt sad. An abstract cultural gender
story had become a little prison, keeping her from enjoying what felt natural
and intuitive to her.
This whole topic of gender stories and love hits close to home for me. In
fact, my husband, Todd, and I never would have become a couple if I hadn’t
taken Introduction to Women’s Studies during my sophomore year at the
University of Michigan. Backstory: Todd and I lived across the hall from
each other in our freshman year. We quickly became close friends—I was
drawn to his sense of humor, generosity, and gentleness. I loved how “me” I
felt when I was with him. No pretense. Lots of authenticity. It became clear
that his feelings for me were going from “friends” to “more than friends,”
but I was holding myself back. The package he came in didn’t fit with my
very narrow definition of masculinity. He was shorter than me (and still is).
He didn’t own any tools (and still doesn’t). He didn’t enjoy fishing or
hunting (and still doesn’t). I didn’t know how to get past that, so I kept him
in a “friend box” in my head. Until I took a Women’s Studies class in which
I learned that our culture heaps a dizzying number of assumptions and
“shoulds” onto a male body and a female body. It was as if someone opened
a door for me!
Suddenly, rather than feeling fearful that I couldn’t be drawn to him
because he didn’t manifest masculine qualities in the way that felt familiar
to me (read: how my dad and step-dad manifest masculine qualities), I had
the freedom to get in touch with all the ways that I did (and do) feel drawn
to him: his smell, his hairy chest, his touch, his even temper, his ability to
solve problems—a different kind of handyman. Becoming aware of how I
had internalized cultural gender stories set him free from the tiny prison
inside my mind. It also set me free! I could be the one with the toolbox, and
I could be nearly six feet tall without apology. Awareness of the sneaky
ways that gender stories infiltrate our intimate relationships grants us the
space to choose, consciously, what works and what doesn’t work for us—
rather than automatically going with what society dictates we “should” do.

We will never transcend our cultural context, but our self-awareness is
our trusted guide as we figure out how to live well among a bombardment
of noisy and often-conflicting messages about love. “Be your own person!”
“Let someone love you!” “Don’t back down!” “Lean in!” Being able to
look critically at our culture’s stories (especially about dependence and
gender) is a gateway to freedom. The happiest couples I know are the ones
who are able to create and inhabit love stories that are good enough. Not
perfect: good enough.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
As we name cultural stories and connect with how those stories shape us, we can
choose a path that honors our unique love truths.

Leaning on Each Other
Take a look at the list of words and
phrases below, and circle the ones that
you heard or still hear most often in the
family you grew up in:

Alone

Together

Sacrifice

Mine

Ours

We

Me

You

Us

I

Unit

Independent

Myself

Family

They

Our culture

Our values

Our beliefs

Tradition

Ritual

Individual

Duty

Loyalty

Obligation

Selfish

Selfless

Separate

Commitment

Take a look at the words you circled,
and decide where your family falls on a
continuum from individualistic
(operating as individuals living under
the same roof) to collectivistic
(operating as a unit).

Individualistic

Collectivistic

Next, think about whether your family’s
“we-ness” shapes your family’s story
about interdependence. In what ways did
the people in your family of origin give
the message “You can lean on us” versus
“Stand on your own two feet”? On the
next page, mark with an X the place on
this spectrum your family falls.

Independent

Interdependent

Dependent

(Stand on your own two feet)

(We lean on each other)

(Don’t leave us)

Now return to the words above. Circle
the three words that best capture what
you value most in an intimate
relationship. Are these words similar to
or different from the words you circled
about your family of origin? What is
your reaction to this?
Finally, return to the spectrum from
independent to dependent and circle the
place on the spectrum where you would
like your intimate relationship to fall.
Notice where the circle is relative to
where the X is. What is your reaction to
this?
Sharing Your Gender Story
Meet up with a friend, family member,
or partner and take turns sharing your
gender stories using the following
questions as your guide:

What were early messages you got about
being a boy or being a girl?

What did you come to believe about what
people of your sex should or shouldn’t
do?
What activities, toys, opportunities, et
cetera did you not take advantage of
because of your sex?
In what ways did the messages you
received about your gender help your
self-confidence? Hurt your selfconfidence?
What feelings come up in you as you
share your gender story?

When one of you is being the storyteller,
make sure the other person is practicing
mindful listening by doing the
following:

• Listen in order to understand, not in
order to respond. Keep your attention in
the present moment. If you find your
mind wandering or thinking about your
own answers to these questions, bring
your attention back to simply listening.
• Make only reflective and validating
comments: “I see” or “wow.”

• Ask only clarifying questions: “Can you
tell me more about that?” “What do you
mean by that?”
• Avoid giving advice or attempting to
influence the other person’s perspective.

After each of you has had the
opportunity to share your gender story
and to listen mindfully, talk together
about the following:

What were some similarities and
differences in your stories?
What felt surprising or upsetting to each
of you about this exercise?
What was it like to listen mindfully? To
what degree was it similar to how you
usually listen? To what degree was it a
new experience for you?
What was it like to be mindfully listened
to? To what degree was that a new
experience for you?

Lesson 7

Surrender the Fairy Tale
Commitment is inherent in any genuinely loving relationship.
—M. Scott Peck

All fairy tales seem to end the same way, don’t they? “And they lived
happily ever after.” Romantic comedies too…the couple walks hand in hand
into the sunset, more or less. We never get the chance to fast-forward and
see the couple on an ordinary Tuesday evening, paying bills and watching
Netflix. The images of love that we consume through television and movies
tend to be highly romanticized and idealized, quite far removed from the
realities and complexities of a real intimate relationship. What impact does
that have on us?
For my dissertation research, I interviewed heterosexual couples who
had been married for between one and three years, asking them to tell me
their “love stories” (Solomon 2001). One of the questions I would ask
toward the end was “How would you say that married life, in reality,
compares to your expectations of how it would be?” I was surprised by how
many of them told me that the realities of married life felt disappointing.
One woman said, “I just thought we’d look at each other differently. Or
there would be this feeling when we were sitting on the couch watching TV,
but nope, we’re sitting on the couch watching TV.” Another expressed, “I
just thought it was going to be more like talking about things, talking about
our feelings…and that doesn’t happen.”
Real-life love stories don’t look the way they do on our screens, and
real-life love stories change over time. In this lesson, we will explore how
real love, in real relationships, changes and evolves—and how we must
change and evolve as well.

Love Stories Also Have Chapters

Every intimate relationship is a love story with unique chapters that detail a
couple’s highs, lows, special events, and turning points, yet in most love
stories, three major chapters almost always make an appearance:
Early Idealization > The Fall from Grace > Brave Love
When two people meet and begin to fall in love, the first chapter, Early
Idealization, predominates. What stands out to you most are those qualities
that you feel make your partner extraordinary. He is the funniest, the
smartest, and the sexiest. Research has indicated, in fact, that the brain of
someone who is falling in love resembles the brain of someone who is
addicted to drugs or struggling with obsessive-compulsive disorder (Fisher
2004; Parker-Pope 2007). As we fall in love, we tend to be obsessive,
yearning, craving, and prone to ruminative thinking about our beloved. This
state of affairs cannot go on forever. People have to work, after all!
Idealization is an untenable biochemical stew inside of your brain. Plus,
humans are far too fallible for this kind of relationship. At some point, the
funniest-smartest-sexiest man you’ve ever met will inevitably do something
un-funny, un-smart, or un-sexy, calling your idealization into question.
When he falls from his pedestal, chapter 1 ends and chapter 2 begins:
The Fall from Grace. He forgets to call when he says he will. He says
something insensitive. It might be you who falls from your pedestal first,
freaking out the morning of a big presentation and shattering his image of
you as calm, cool, and collected. The fall from grace may come in the form
of your first fight or the first time you face a crisis together (such as the loss
of a job, a health scare, or a family member’s death). Regardless of the
triggering event, the fall from grace will come. Even though it is normal
and inevitable, the shift it creates in a relationship can feel quite upsetting,
disappointing, and confusing.
All hope is not lost. Because when couples survive the fall from grace,
they end up in a pretty amazing chapter: Brave Love. Brave love is an
authentic and deeply connected place in which both partners get to be
imperfect and worthy of love. As happy couples describe, “I can just be
myself.” People in this love chapter have a different brain chemistry from
people in the early stages of love. The relationship is now fueled by the
chemicals of attachment—oxytocin and vasopressin (Fisher 2004). When

we are attached to each other, we value feeling safe, trusted, and trusting. In
that place of brave love, both partners are committed to a “relationship of
constancy,” as M. Scott Peck calls it, showing up again and again for the
relationship because it feels worthwhile and because you promised you
would. People in this chapter of love enjoy the benefits of security but may
also struggle to maintain a passionate connection.
Here’s how moving through these chapters looks in real life. My client
Diana was married at the time, but it didn’t keep her from falling hard and
fast for Tom. Ten years older, Tom was a handsome, successful, and wellknown businessman. She was deeply unhappy in her marriage, and Tom
represented everything her husband was not. She left her marriage and
lapped up every ounce of Early Idealization. Tom was certainly easy for her
to idealize…until he was staying at her place and got hit with a raging case
of food poisoning. Seeing him weak, needy, and quite literally out of
control rattled her deeply. She came to our next therapy session questioning
him, questioning herself, and questioning the whole relationship. “This is
what I left my marriage for?” she said. I wondered out loud to her whether
their love story had just been flung headfirst out of the romance of Early
Idealization into the messiness of the Fall from Grace. Framing it this way
—as an inevitable and normal development—gave her comfort and allowed
us to explore what, exactly, from her individual life story led her to feel so
triggered by their fall from grace.
See whether any of the following statements sound familiar to you:
It’s hard to let myself fall for someone. I protect myself from how
scary and vulnerable it is to like someone that much by being
critical and really picky of him or her.
It’s hard to let someone fall for me. I am uncomfortable up on that
pedestal. I wonder what’s wrong with the person if he or she is so
into me.
I freak out during the Fall from Grace chapter. I tend to leave at the
first sign of a problem.
I feel able to handle the first fight, but I keep partnering with people
who don’t want to get down in the muck with me.

That Brave Love chapter is hard for me. I start feeling bored and
disappointed. I crave novelty.
To me, Brave Love feels too “normal.” I don’t trust it.
It is possible to struggle in any or all of these chapters, and there are no easy
or obvious fixes. Know that it is brave to even look at your patterns and
tendencies, and identifying a tender spot within you puts you miles ahead of
those whose story is a flat, thin “I just haven’t found the right person yet.”
If you have identified a chapter in which you tend to struggle, here are
some ideas to keep in mind:
Name it to tame it. The mere act of identifying (naming) a pattern
or tendency changes your relationship to the pattern or tendency
(Siegel 2010).
Become aware and make a choice. When a pattern is brought out
into the open, into your conscious awareness, you have choices
including talking about your pattern with your intimate partner.
There is a back-and-forth dynamic between trust and intimacy:
intimacy grows trust, and trust paves the way for deeper intimacy.
Tie the present to the past. How does this particular pattern relate
to an old story that you carry from the family you grew up in?
Embrace the both/and. Look for a dialectic that may be hidden
within your feelings. For example: “I am both afraid of conflict and
trusting of myself to handle it.”
Remember that we come by our relationship “stuff” for good reasons.
Taking note of where fear rears its head in your intimate relationship gives
you an opportunity to go deep and expand your relational self-awareness.

Should I Stay or Should I Go?
Although there are lessons to be learned in every intimate relationship, not
every relationship can or should make it to the Brave Love chapter.

Relationships end. Students and therapy clients frequently ask themselves
(and me), “How do I know whether to stay or go?” Ending an intimate
relationship is deeply personal, so it is impossible to speak in absolutes.
However, it is worthwhile to identify some relationship dynamics that
signal that you’re experiencing something more than a fall from grace—
you’re experiencing a relationship with a poor prognosis.
Untreated Addiction
Untreated addiction to alcohol, drugs, gambling, pornography, and so on
in one or both partners wreaks havoc on an intimate relationship. I am
careful to say untreated addiction. People who are practicing their recovery
often create incredibly rich intimate relationships because they have
stripped away defenses, come face-to-face with their wounds and fears, and
lived to tell about it. Unfortunately, no intimate relationship can compete
with an active addiction. Addiction is just too powerful.
Abuse
Abuse (emotional, sexual, or physical) and love cannot exist in the same
space at the same time. As feminist scholar Dr. bell hooks says, “Abuse and
neglect negate love. Care and affirmation, the opposite of abuse and
humiliation, are the foundation of love. No one can rightfully claim to be
loving when behaving abusively” (2000, 22). When there is abuse in an
intimate relationship, individual therapy is needed for both partners. The
one who is being abusive must explore and heal whatever is triggering the
abusive behavior—usually having been a victim of abuse as a child. And
the one who is being abused must have space and time to heal,
reestablishing boundaries, self-love, and self-worth.
Patterns of Dishonesty and Betrayal
Infidelity is a relationship-changer. In the wake of an affair, some
couples choose to stay together and rebuild—hard work that in the best-case
scenario grows both partners. Other couples end their relationship. The
prognosis is worse when infidelity is a recurring problem, indicating a

pattern of deceit. Remember that dishonesty and betrayal take other forms,
too, such as lying about money and work.
Lack of Love
Research shows that couples therapists rank a lack of love to be the
most difficult problem to treat—more difficult even than addiction or
infidelity (Whisman, Dixon, and Johnson 1997). We value love as the glue
that holds an intimate relationship together. In fact, the vast majority of
Americans (93 percent) report that love is the most important factor in
marrying someone (Pew Research Center 2010). When we say, “I love you,
but I’m not ‘in love’ with you,” it may mean that we need to ask ourselves:
“What is keeping me from showing up fully and engaging in this
relationship? Where is my passion, enthusiasm, and engagement if not here
in the relationship?”
As we discussed earlier in this lesson, keeping passion alive is the longterm work of love, and it is the work of both partners. However, a lack of
love is different. It usually indicates that a relationship was built initially for
pragmatic or strategic reasons (for example, an unplanned pregnancy).
Sometimes love grows from nothing (many arranged marriages begin with
a commitment and become rich love stories), but sometimes it does not.
Asymmetrical Revitalization
Last, I want to touch on a subtle but troubling dynamic that Thomas
Moore (1995) calls “asymmetrical revitalization.” This term captures a
situation in which one partner is invested in being self-reflective, open, and
curious about the rich and mysterious world of the intimate relationship,
and the other partner is not. Jacob and Wendy are a couple like this. Jacob
views conflict as an opportunity to learn more about how each of them
perceives the world, the self, and each other. He is curious about what
makes him tick, and he values relationship talk. Wendy prefers to sweep
stuff under the rug as quickly as possible. As she says, “I don’t do feelings.”
He implored her to do couples therapy with him because he felt they were
drifting apart. She refused. After years of feeling that he lacked a partner in
the deepest sense, he ended the relationship. Asymmetrical revitalization

challenges a relationship because it leaves partners feeling that they are on
different wavelengths.

A Brave Love Fairy Tale
When I hear people say, “I don’t believe in couples therapy,” it is a red flag
to me. I stifle the urge to say, “Couples therapy is not Santa Claus. It
exists!” Not believing in couples therapy is rooted in a fairy tale full of
abstract shoulds: Love should be easy; we should be able to handle this on
our own; people should keep their problems to themselves. Taking a stand
against couples therapy is like drowning but refusing to reach for the life
preserver that is being offered. In the “Marriage 101” course, I implore
students to say yes if and when their intimate partner asks, “Can we do
some couples therapy?” And I implore you to say yes as soon as you are
asked, even if you don’t really love the idea. When couples therapy begins
after months or years of stalling and avoiding, a large wall of negativity has
been built. Couples therapy is challenging as it is. Why make it harder by
having to do the difficult work of tearing down, brick by brick, a wall of
resentment built because it took so long to get help?
If we peered into the ordinary Tuesday evening of our favorite fairy-tale
couple, living out their happily ever after, I hope we would see them
embodying brave love—respecting romance yet tolerating disappointment,
inviting passion yet navigating frustration, seeking deep connection yet
enduring conflict. Identifying yourself as a “hopeless romantic” is totally
fine, as long as your fairy tale includes dark days and courage in the face of
challenges.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Intimate relationships involve messy, confusing, beautiful work that makes you
grow and evolve like nothing else can. Surrender the fairy tale and embrace
brave love.

I Am Grateful

Living in a space of brave love requires
staying present to all the ways that
goodness permeates your life, as it is
right here and right now. Therefore, if
you don’t already, begin to keep a
gratitude journal. This simple practice
can shift your perspective toward seeing
what is good, right, and plentiful in your
world, releasing fear, craving, and envy.
It is one of the easiest and most effective
self-care practices around, and research
has indicated that practices that increase
feelings of gratitude are correlated with
happier relationships, better emotional
health, and less stress (Wood, Froh, and
Geraghty 2010; Gordon, Arnette, and
Smith 2011). You can keep a notebook
next to your bed or you can download a
gratitude journal app like the one at
http://www.getgratitude.co. Some
people like to spend a few minutes at the
end of each day writing down a few
things they are grateful for. Others
prefer one longer weekly entry.
Here are a few tips for keeping a gratitude journal:
• Instead of just mindlessly going through
the motions, take a moment and say to
yourself that you are doing this for your
well-being and to improve the quality of
your relationship.
• Focus on people, not just things.

• Focus on what is surprising or
unexpected.
• Reflect on what your life would be like
without those blessings.

Love Chapters
Write a table of contents for one of your
intimate relationships, past or current,
making sure that you name each chapter.
Then reflect on the extent to which the
love-story chapters we talked about in
this lesson—Early Idealization, The Fall
from Grace, Brave Love—fit your love
story. How have you handled the
opportunities and challenges of each of
these chapters?
If you have had more than one
significant intimate relationship, you
might want to create a table of contents
for each and then compare them to each
other. What patterns stand out to you?

Lesson 8

Keep the Soul in Soulmate
A soulmate is the one person whose love is powerful enough to motivate
you to meet your soul, to do the emotional work of self-discovery, of
awakening.
—Kenny Loggins

What do you collect? Whether it be action figures, books, or antique
porcelain frogs, I’m guessing there’s something you enjoy gathering and
treasuring. For me, it’s beach glass and quotes about love, especially quotes
about soulmates, and the Kenny Loggins quote is just one of many in my
collection. The theme of soulmates is one of my favorite love-related topics
to explore because it invites multiple perspectives, and the topic creates the
opportunity to ask, “What do I believe?”
First things first: Here’s what I don’t believe. I don’t believe that your
soulmate is your perfect match. Research by social psychologists Spike W.
S. Lee and Norbert Schwartz (2014) indicates that believing your soulmate
is your perfect match can set you up for unhealthy patterns. They found that
people who use a perfect-match definition of soulmates tend to experience
overreactions to conflict and lower relationship satisfaction. It makes sense,
right? If I believe that you are my perfect match, when we bump up against
inevitable conflict or our “fall from grace,” I am going to feel disappointed
and confused. People who subscribe to this perspective tend to use the
language of should when talking about love: “It shouldn’t feel like this.”
“We shouldn’t have this problem.”

Soulmates Three Ways
Awareness of your stance on the notion of soulmates is more than a
philosophical exercise. How you relate to the soulmate idea impacts how
you think, feel, and act in your intimate relationship. In the service of

relational self-awareness, let’s journey through three perspectives on
soulmates. I’ll weigh in on each as we go (no surprise!). Before you read
the three perspectives below, write down any current beliefs you have about
soulmates, and see whether your perspective changes after you read this
lesson.
1. A Soulmate Is Your “Bashert”
“I didn’t marry you because you were perfect. I didn’t even marry
you because I loved you. I married you because you gave me a
promise. That promise made up for your faults. And the promise I
gave you made up for mine. Two imperfect people got married and it
was the promise that made the marriage. And when our children
were growing up, it wasn’t a house that protected them; and it
wasn’t our love that protected them—it was that promise.”
The Yiddish word for soulmate is bashert, and the belief here is that,
before birth, God decides who your spouse will be—a “match made in
heaven.” One soul is split and inhabits two bodies. Soulmates find each
other, and the wedding is the joining, or rejoining, of souls. According to
this belief, your spouse truly is your other half (maybe even your better
half?), and Tom Cruise’s words to Renée Zellweger in the film Jerry
Maguire fit here: “You complete me.” When my students explore this
definition, they initially express despair: “What if I live in New York and
my bashert lives in New Zealand?” Those who practice from this belief
story must also have faith that destiny or divine assistance will lead them to
each other’s arms.
Belief in bashert serves as a vessel that buoys a couple during their
journey of love. Couples who share a story that their union was created and
is supported by a force bigger than them feel a sense of comfort,
connection, and meaning. The Thornton Wilder (1942, 92–93) quote used
here doesn’t specifically refer to God, does it? It refers to a promise. I
include the quote in this perspective because the energy feels the same to
me—two people connect and remain committed to that connection because
something bigger than them acts as the container or the vessel. Belief in

God. Belief in remaining true to a promise. Belief acts as an anchor for your
values, which then guides your thoughts and actions. If, for example, I
begin to wonder what a relationship with someone else would be like, or if I
begin to flirt with others out of curiosity or boredom, I can use this
soulmate perspective to reconnect with what I value and what I believe.
This first soulmate perspective invites faith and surrender.
2. A Soulmate Is a Fellow Traveler
“People think they have to find their soulmate to have a good
marriage… Anyone you meet already has soulmates… Their mother,
their father, their lifelong friends. You get married, and after twenty
years of loving, bearing and raising children, and meeting
challenges, then you’ll have ‘created’ soulmate status.”
This quote from Diane Sollee (2016), director of the Coalition for
Marriage, Family and Couples Education, focuses on love as a journey that
two people take together. Moving through space and time together creates
the soulmate bond. The research project that highlighted greater
relationship dissatisfaction among those who see soulmates as the perfect
match also found that those who view soulmates as fellow travelers tended
to have more adaptive perspectives on relationships. There’s a joke that fits
with this definition. A man approaches his rabbi and asks, “How do I know
whether my wife is my soulmate?” The rabbi answers, “You know because
you are married to her.”
Many students have commented that this perspective takes some of the
pressure off. You don’t have to know whether he or she is your soulmate by
the second date! What matters is whether this person is a worthy travel
companion—someone with whom you can build that “relationship of
constancy.” As I write that sentence, I look up from my computer and see
my neighbors holding hands as they walk toward their house after taking
the garbage to the curb. They are in their seventies, with kids and grandkids
—fellow travelers for years and years. Seeing them as I write this brings a
smile to my face. Who knew taking out the trash could be so romantic?

To me this perspective feels pragmatic, loyal, and without angst. Here,
there’s no churning about the existential, the metaphysical, the unknown.
There’s no “Are we?” or “Aren’t we?” It’s just you and me, moving through
days, months, and years together, continuing to show up because we are an
“us.” Lovely.
3. A Soulmate Wakes You Up
“People think a soul mate is your perfect fit, and that’s what
everyone wants. But a true soul mate is a mirror, the person who
shows you everything that’s holding you back, the person who
brings you to your own attention so you can change your life. A true
soul mate is probably the most important person you’ll ever meet,
because they tear down your walls and smack you awake. But to live
with a soul mate forever? Nah. Too painful. Soul mates, they come
into your life just to reveal another layer of yourself to you, and then
they leave.”
Elizabeth Gilbert wrote this in her wildly successful book Eat, Pray,
Love (2007, 97). I love the wakeup call of this definition, the invitation to
growth. In my experience, people tend to find her words unsettling for two
reasons. First, woven into the definition is the inevitability of pain. It’s not
smooth sailing. You will see parts of yourself you haven’t seen before. You
will come face-to-face with your past, your shadow, your hiding places,
your tender spots. Second, according to Gilbert, soulmate relationships are
vital and time limited. No “till death do us part” here! A soulmate
relationship creates a crisis and a crucible for transformation, allowing us to
experience, in the next relationship, a more conscious love. Do I believe
that crisis, transformation, and more-conscious love can happen all with the
same partner? Of course. My relationship with Todd is living proof. As we
have evolved individually and together, we have had several different
marriages within our marriage.
What I also like and value about Gilbert’s perspective is that rather than
viewing a relationship that has ended as a failure, she opens the possibility

of viewing a relationship that has ended as a completion. The relationship
did what it was created to do, and now it is complete.

Soulmates Embodied
When the soulmate research mentioned earlier was published, I was asked
to be part of a panel with one of the study’s authors. The question for our
panel was: “Should you believe in soulmates?” As I mentioned in the
previous lesson, I find the question “Do you believe in X or not?” to be
rather strange. The belief is out there already, so really the question should
go something like: “Do you embrace a belief in X or not? How does a belief
in X serve you or not? Does it enhance or constrain you? Open or close
you? Elevate or sadden you?” My perspective was clear during that
interview and remains the same today: I am 100 percent in support of you
believing in soulmates as long as your soulmate definition includes the
notion that soulmate relationships involve and invite deep, courageous, and
sometimes emotionally painful work for each individual and for the couple.
Remember: you have free will—you can see the potential for juicy and
valuable lessons inherent in a particular intimate relationship, but you get to
choose whether you want to “sign up” for those lessons. Sure, any number
of factors may make it difficult to exercise your free will (a particularly
fateful first encounter, feelings of loneliness, powerful sexual chemistry, a
whole host of “shoulds”), but it always goes back to you and your deepest
truth, as you can best see, hear, and feel it in the present moment. Here’s an
example. On date number two, Stephanie finds out that Will spent a brief
time in jail when he was nineteen years old. She is grateful that he is upfront about his history, and she feels his story of how he learned from the
experience is rich and authentic (not defensive or full of rationalizations and
excuses). She feels compassion for him and sees the learning that would be
possible within this relationship, yet she is just not interested in “signing
up” for this learning. She doesn’t need to label him as a bad guy (blaming
him for the relationship not working), nor does she need to beat herself up
for being closed-minded (shaming herself for how she “should” be). She
honors the infinite mysteries inherent in love and chooses another path.
Soulmate beliefs are there for the taking. They are not hard-and-fast
rules. They are deeply personal and dynamic. Use a soulmate belief where

and when it amplifies what you value and know to be your deepest truth
today. Release the belief when and if it acts like an emotional prison. Bring
awareness to what you believe at this moment in time, witnessing whether
and how it works for you.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Your beliefs about soulmates shape how you approach an intimate relationship.

Working Definition
Journal about how you define
soulmates. Before reading this lesson,
what did you believe about soulmates?
Which of the soulmate descriptions in
this lesson resonates with you the most?
Why? Which of the soulmate
descriptions in this lesson do you find
yourself resisting the most? Why?
Breaking Open
Write down the names of three people
you feel close to: intimate partner,
friend, and/or family member. Under
each name, create a list of lessons
learned from him or her. Make another
list of what you think that person has
learned from being in a relationship with
you. To what degree do any or all of
these feel like soulmate relationships?
Why or why not?

Soulmates in Action
Reach out to someone you feel close to
—a friend, a sibling, or an ex—and ask
what his or her relationship with you has
taught him or her about him- or herself.
Here are some questions you could ask:

What did you learn about yourself from
our relationship? In what ways do you
feel that I am a teacher to you?
In what ways do you feel that you are a
teacher to me?
What is your perspective on soulmates?
To what extent does our relationship feel
like a soulmate relationship to you?

Lesson 9

Listen to Your Gut
The compass of the entire universe is within you.
—Wayne Dyer

You’d be surprised to know how much time I spend during therapy
sessions and lectures pointing to my belly. The belly plays such a critical
role in intimate relationships that we are going to dedicate an entire lesson
to the vital data that comes from… the belly. I’m talking, of course, about
intuition, or gut feelings. There are certainly times when you need to rely on
your head in order to think your way through a situation. And there are
certainly times when you need to rely on your heart in order to feel your
way through a situation. But you may underestimate the value of relying on
your gut in order to sense your way through a situation.

Red Light, Green Light
As adults, we take in great quantities of external noise about who we
“should” be and how we “should” live. Our world is chock-full of
judgments and opinions and advice. This noise can be so loud, in fact, that
it is nearly impossible to hear ourselves from within. But I don’t think we
start off unable to tune in to ourselves.
I remember playing Chutes and Ladders with my daughter Courtney
when she was about six years old. She pulled a fast one, moving her piece
an extra spot in order to avoid a dreaded big slide that would knock her
from nearly the finish line to nearly the start. I watched her do it, and I
could see her choice written all over her sheepish freckled face. I was at a
parental crossroads as I contemplated my next move. Luckily, I was
experiencing a moment of mama-clarity. I took my turn, quietly and with a
neutral face, as I could tell that she was standing at her own crossroads.
Within a minute or so, she said quietly, “Mommy, I cheated a little.” I asked

her to take a deep breath and be still for a moment, and then said,
“Courtney, I’m so glad you’re telling me this. Tell me, how did cheating
feel in your body?” “Bad,” she said. “Where did you feel that bad feeling?”
“Right here,” she said, pointing to her belly.
I talked to her for a moment about “green light” feelings and “red light”
feelings. “Green light” feelings tell you that the choices you’re making are
healthy and aligned with the person you are and want to be. “Red light”
feelings tell you that the choices you’re making don’t serve you very well
and probably aren’t best for you. The sense she got in her belly was clearly
a red light feeling.
Did I punish her? Nope. Any desire to teach her some abstract (and
external) lesson about how she should behave was trumped by my desire to
strengthen her ability to tune in to herself, as I trust that she came into this
world with an internal compass. Her life will afford her many moments of
choice, and I won’t always be there to praise her “green light” choices and
give consequences for her “red light” choices. What will always be there is
her gut.

Bodily Truth
It’s called a “visceral” feeling or reaction for a reason. Your viscera
(stomach and intestines) have nerve cells (neurons) that send data, via a
lightning-fast neural pathway called lamina I in your spinal cord, up to your
brain. Most of us think of the brain as the central processing unit that tells
the rest of the body what to do, but this finding affirms what we intuitively
know: We obtain valuable information from the bottom up! It’s the sense
you get that someone is looking at you. The chill in your spine when
someone is being dishonest or malicious. The twisting-up feeling you get
when you’re saying yes but you really mean no. It’s the feeling that
Courtney had in her belly when she cheated at Chutes and Ladders.
Beyond the brilliant biology of gut feelings, there’s something else at
work. Let’s look at the Dr. Wayne Dyer quote from the beginning of this
lesson: “The compass of the entire universe is within you.” Entire books
have been written about this idea of collective wisdom or the intelligence of
the universe. Each of us is connected to that vast collective wisdom, and we
can source it for comfort and guidance.

I have been a provider and consumer of traditional psychotherapy for
many years, and it has benefited me tremendously. Since I was in my
twenties, I have also dabbled in spirituality—read a book here, attended a
workshop there. In recent years, I have become deeply committed to
bringing my spiritual self into everything I do, and I can say with
confidence it has been nothing short of life-changing for me! By widening
my lens to honor what is beyond the world of our five senses, I am better
able to handle stress; I feel more connected to my husband, friends, and
family; and I trust life a whole lot more than I used to. Whether or not you
integrate religious or spiritual practice into your life today, I suspect you
have had experiences of tapping into whatever it is that is bigger, wiser, and
older than we are. I feel connected to this big universal energy frequently
because I value making time and space to consciously connect—but long
before I valued “seeking,” those experiences found me anyway. I am
guessing they find you too.
I remember being on vacation with my family one time when I was
going through a difficult breakup. I walked down to the rocks on the lake
while everyone was sleeping. The moonlight on the water sparkled like
diamonds. I cried for a while and then felt strangely calm—held, safe, and
connected to something bigger and wiser than me. I was both heartbroken
and safe. Similarly, when my dad passed away a few years ago, trusting
something bigger than I am helped me ride huge waves of grief while also
experiencing the joy of memories of him and a renewed gratitude for life.
For me, holding on to both/and—in this case, grief and joy—is much easier
to do when the dialectic is supercharged or wrapped in connection to greater
mystery and wisdom. Sometimes that gut-level knowing guides our actions
(trust this person, quit this job, and so forth), but sometimes that gut-level
knowing just reminds us that we can endure a particularly dark chapter.

Love in Phone World
Regardless of whether you think about your gut feelings as pure biology or
as biology mixed with something divine, your ability to listen to and respect
your gut impacts your love life from the first date on. It’s a big part of why I
am suspicious about relationships that largely exist in what comedian and
author Aziz Ansari calls “phone world” (2015). Especially as you’re getting

to know someone, one-dimensional, screen-based communication
compromises your ability to make use of your most powerful relational tool
—your gut. It’s very hard to sense, in that deep visceral way, how you feel
with someone unless you are both in the same space at the same time. In
our high-tech, fast-paced, information-heavy digital age, we must remember
and honor our oldest and wisest tool of discernment.
One of my clients was in a long-distance relationship with a guy she
really liked. He cheated on her a few months into the relationship. Both of
them desperately wanted to stay together, and they were trying hard to
rebuild trust. Despite hours communicating via text and FaceTime, she
could not let him back in. There were multiple factors at work, but at some
point I reflected to her how truly difficult it must be to rebuild trust without
being in the same space at the same time. His words were sincere, his
behavior was congruent, but she could not feel him. Her head could take in
his words. Her heart could be full of love for him. But without being able to
involve all of her senses, it seemed her viscera simply could not cooperate. I
felt grateful that she took her emotions seriously, as agreeing to rebuild with
a gnawing feeling inside would have felt like a dishonoring of self. They
ultimately made the courageous and difficult choice to let each other go.

Listening to Yourself
Sadly, even though we are gifted deep inner wisdom at birth, it is all too
easy to lose contact with this potent data source. The noise of the external
world gets so loud. We are told in a myriad of ways that we need outside
sets of rules to follow, and that, if left to our own devices, we will be out of
control, dangerous, and destructive. As children, we are told in so many
ways (by parents, schools, and religious institutions), “I know better than
you what’s best for you.” Dating and relationship books that offer rules and
formulas for success are both seductive and risky. What if following
someone else’s recipe requires you to further disconnect from your
compass?
If you identify as a “people pleaser,” you likely ignore your gut feelings
on the regular. Symptoms of ignoring gut feelings include resentment; slow,
simmering anger; a sense of internal flatness; and boredom. There’s a
gender socialization piece here as well. Girls and women (more so than

boys and men) are praised and rewarded for being nice, agreeable, and
accommodating, which may make it more natural to ignore our internal
signals to act otherwise.
I get it. Gut feelings can be quite inconvenient. I was recently asked to
do something at work. I really wanted to say yes because I could tell that
the person asking really wanted me to say yes. Unfortunately, I could feel,
clear as can be, within my gut that my deepest truth was “No, I am not able
to do that at this time.” I tried to look at the situation in different ways,
using my head (What if I… Maybe I could…). I could also hear a variety of
internalized and old stories from the outside world playing inside my head
(A good employee would… You should… People will be mad if you don’t…).
Despite all of this internal drama, my gut would not relent. Every time I
imagined saying yes, my gut tightened in a familiar way. So I said no, and I
survived the consequences. If I had made the choice to be a people pleaser,
I would undoubtedly have experienced the symptoms of having ignored a
gut feeling: resentment and dread. Yet, saying no was tough because it
meant disappointing someone.
“What If My Gut Feeling Is to Punch Someone in the Face?”
I was recently teaching the idea of listening to your gut to a group of
students, and a guy asked me the above question. Basically, he was asking
whether you can justify any behavior by claiming that it was your gut
feeling. No. It doesn’t work like that. Wanting to punch someone in the face
is a reflection of being emotionally triggered: fired up, set off, upset in the
moment. When triggered, it is hard (dare I say impossible?) to access deep
inner knowing. Emotions swirl, and the internal buzz drowns out intuition.
Intense negative feelings are a cue to stop and begin an all-hands-on-deck
effort to slow down and quiet down before making a next move. From an
empowered (not triggered) place, you can then be curious about your
reactivity, asking, “What is the story I am telling myself about the
situation?” This question invites depth—depth that reaches down to your
gut, the root of knowing. From that deeper and quieter space within,
multiple paths emerge, indicating next steps you might want or need to take.
In all likelihood, none of those paths will involve punching someone in the
face.

“Is It Anxiety, or Is It a Gut Feeling?”
I remember putting our wedding invitations in the mail and promptly
freaking out. Sweaty palms, racing heart, and thoughts like, “What am I
getting myself into?” flooded me. Was this anxiety or a gut feeling?
Sometimes it is hard to tell.
Yet, if you can bring some awareness to your reactions, you can learn
how anxious feelings and gut feelings show up in their own ways in your
body. Discerning the difference can guide your course of action. To me (and
many others), anxiety feels like tightness in my chest and pressure in my
head. Anxious, frantic thoughts and stories flood and swirl around in my
brain. By contrast, data that comes from my gut feels more raw, primary,
and unfiltered. And what’s become especially noticeable to me is how I feel
when I ignore my gut. That feeling is a low, slow tightening or twisting of
my insides.
In this case of the wedding invitations, anxiety would have been
nervousness about the magnitude of my decision to marry Todd. A gut
feeling would have been a deep inner knowing that I was making a “red
light” choice. Ultimately deciding that my freak-out was a result of anxiety
led me to work on calming myself down and talking with people I trust
about how nervous I was feeling. If I had decided that my freak-out was in
fact a gut feeling, it might have led me to reconsider marrying Todd.
When my clients are sitting with this question, we work together on
quieting their bodies and minds so they can carefully attend to what is
happening within. Sometimes, a client’s relationship doubts are a reflection
of fear-based old stories about the self (“I can’t believe that someone would
really stay with me. I’m worthless.”), but sometimes a client’s relationship
doubts indicate that something truly is amiss in the relationship. A sense
that “something doesn’t feel right” certainly warrants exploration. For a
summary of the work of this lesson, you can go online and download the
handout “How to Listen to Your Gut and Why” (at
http://www.newharbinger.com/35814).

Steps Toward Loving Bravely

Brave relationship choices require trusting the vital information that comes from
your intuitive knowing, your gut.

Family Voice
Write a journal entry about how your
family of origin related to your gut
feelings. In what ways did your family
honor your inner knowing, giving you
the message “You are wise and your
inner voice should be honored”? In what
ways did your family’s dynamics take
you out of contact with your inner voice,
giving you the message “We know
what’s best for you”? This is
complicated, of course, as all kids need
guidance, instruction, and support from
the adults in their lives. But some
parents find ways to celebrate their
child’s inner wisdom while also holding
boundaries and setting limits. How did
your parents navigate this?
Listening from Within
It’s important to be able to discern
anxiety versus intuition, so practice
tuning in to yourself. The next time you
are approaching a decision, quiet down
and pay attention to your insides before
making your choice. Learn—or, more
accurately, remember—how your gut
feelings talk to you. What is your gut
saying to you as you stand at this
crossroads?

First, practice pausing and listening to
your intuitive voice with small
decisions: “What do I want to order for
dinner?” “Should I go out or stay home
tonight?” Can you hear the voice that
speaks to you from underneath the
“should”? In what ways does it speak
differently than the voice of shoulds?
How do you feel when you obey the
voice of should? How do you feel when
you honor your gut-level feeling? How
are those two feelings different?
As you feel comfortable listening to
your deep knowing when you make
small decisions, try listening to your
deep knowing as you face large
decisions as well: “Do I want a second
date with this person?” “What would it
be like to ask the person I’m dating how
serious she wants to be?” “How well is
this job serving me?” Try to listen for
the voice of should and the voice of
your gut.

Lesson 10

Source Your Life
Tell me, what is it you plan to do with your one wild and precious life?
—Mary Oliver

Some years back, I had an “aha” moment that was really good for me and
for my intimate relationship. Todd and I participated in a fundraising walk
in downtown Chicago for a national autism organization. The walk ended
on Soldier Field (home of the Chicago Bears), where there was live music,
and kids and families could run, dance, and toss a football to their hearts’
content. To my football-obsessed husband, this was a dream come true. At
some point, we walked up into the stands to observe the scene from above.
Todd put his arm around me and said, “This is my temple. It has been my
temple since I was a kid.” In that moment, I got it, and I surrendered the
final remnants of my long-standing rivalry with the Chicago Bears.
Like many intimate partners, I tended to, in insecure moments, perceive
Todd’s passion for football as a slight against me. I was prone, for many
years, to telling myself a thin and unhelpful story about a love triangle
between Todd, da Bears, and me. My story was that the time he spent with
them took something away from me. Sure, we found ways to muddle
through. We tried pragmatic accommodations: me watching with him
(bust), him skipping an occasional game to be with me (bust). We tried
emotional accommodations: I could talk myself through my icky feelings,
and he had ways of reassuring me of my importance to him. But it wasn’t
until I sat in the stands with him, on that sunny May afternoon, that I
actually transformed my story, once and for all. Seeing through his eyes,
my story thickened up, allowing me to transcend my fears and the
accompanying judgments, and deeply and humbly feel all of what football
means to him. Soldier Field is where he goes to connect to his brothers, the
memory of his father, and the tribe that is all of Bears fans. It’s old, primal,
and, quite frankly, none of my business. Todd without the Bears would

cease to be Todd. In my “aha” moment, I was able to see that I am fortunate
that the man I love knows how to access his deep passion, to stoke his fire.
It is good for him. It is good for us.

Passionate Living
A rich and meaningful love story is best crafted by those committed to
living with passion—those who know how to source their lives (Oriah
1999). Sourcing your life is about feeding yourself from within. This lesson
invites you to ask yourself an essential question: What do I need present in
my life in order to feel alive, joyful, and passionate?
Intimate partners do not necessarily share or need to share those
passions. My passions are uniquely mine. Your passions are uniquely yours.
It is often the case that intimate partners turn away from the relationship
and engage their passion, allowing them to return to the relationship more
openhearted, alive, and engaged. Loving bravely means working to support
passionate living—for yourself and for your partner.
Professor and writer Iris Krasnow (2011) interviewed more than two
hundred wives to learn more about their experiences in married life, and she
was struck by how many of them credited their relationship success to an
outside hobby or passion, often one rediscovered or carried over from
childhood (dance, horseback riding, and so on). She found that those who
stoked their fires from within felt happier in their marriages. Bringing
burnt-out, self-sacrificing, crusty energy to the relationship does not serve
anyone. It is a recipe for resentment.
Much more than “free time” or “downtime,” engaging your passion is
key for emotional wellness, deepening and supporting your relationship
with yourself. Knowing what “turns you on” is an important aspect of
relational self-awareness. Likely there is a menu of practices and activities
that help you access your source: a thirty-minute walk with a special
playlist that calms and opens you, working on your motorcycle at the end of
a long day, or a weekend retreat. Solitude and intimacy are inextricably
bound, with each feeding the other. Turning inward and connecting to
ourselves readies us to turn outward and connect with others.

Getting Curious
If you feel resistant to the idea that couples ought to have passions and
hobbies outside of their primary relationship, holding on to the idea that
“love ought to be enough,” it is worth asking yourself What keeps me from
embracing the idea that partners need and benefit from pursuing passions
outside of the relationship? Old stories may be getting in the way, leading
you to equate turning away in order to refuel, restore, or recharge with
turning away in order to abandon or betray. Perhaps the old story is, “I
ought to be enough for him or her,” so the other person’s passion feels like a
slap in the face, putting you in direct contact with feelings of shame and
inadequacy.
If you find yourself feeling judgmental about your intimate partner’s
outside passion, it is worth asking yourself: What frightens, worries, or
upsets me about my partner’s outside passion? One client of mine was
dating a woman who was an avid tennis player. He found himself irritated
and hurt when she played, wishing she would opt for time with him instead.
He was able to move from a reactive place (making snippy comments to her
or shutting down emotionally on the nights she played) to a curious place
by asking himself the above question. It was helpful for him to explore the
stories he was telling himself about what her playing must mean about her
feelings for him, mostly: “I must not matter very much to her.” From this
brave place of self-awareness, he could share with her the complexity of his
feelings. This allowed them to create work-arounds that felt win-win: she
made extra effort to verbalize her love for him, and they scheduled
additional time to hang out together.
Outside passions merit relational support, yet at times the passion may
directly threaten the integrity of the intimate relationship. For one couple I
saw in therapy, his passion for erotic photography felt to her like a
violation, so we worked together to find a way for him to honor both his
artistic passion and his marriage. This dynamic had many layers of
complexity, but I bring it up here as a reminder that simple rules rarely do
the trick when it comes to love.
If you find yourself holding back from pursuing your passions, ask
yourself: What is the story I tell myself about my passions? In what ways do
I fear my passions will threaten my love life? Another client of mine felt
afraid to find a bible study community for fear that her desire to pursue her

faith would drive her partner away. Whenever we bump up against those
thin, either/or stories, it is an opportunity to seek out the both/and: How can
I celebrate both my passion and my relationship?

Tribal Membership
Cultural stories about how our romantic partner ought to fulfill our every
need (partner, coparent, lover, best friend) can get us into lots of trouble.
Our expectations get set far too high, and disappointment is inevitable.
Certainly, it is reasonable to expect emotional intimacy, conversation, and
mutual support within an intimate relationship, but expecting all of your
support to come from your intimate partner sets you up to feel let down.
Single or partnered, we always need a tribe—treasured and trusted
friends who see us in our fullness and folly and love us anyway. Krasnow
(2016) found that “the wives with the highest marital satisfaction have a
tight circle of wild and warm women friends with whom to drink, travel and
vent.” Men need this too! The best tribes are those that serve love—
honoring vulnerability and struggle, holding space for emotional pain
(resisting the urge to rescue or appease), and offering feedback, opinions,
and advice only when asked.
What about a tribe that doesn’t serve love? For example, a therapy
client of mine wanted desperately to be faithful to her boyfriend, but two of
her close friends were cheating on theirs. Yes, she has free will, but she was
wise to be curious about the impact of their choices on her. Some
friendships foster and enable behaviors that undermine an intimate
relationship, and if that is the case, it can be clarifying to look within and
bravely ask: What part of me is served by participating in a friendship that
compromises my ability to show up fully for my intimate relationship?

Work with Purpose
In addition to passions and friendships, work can be soul-feeding and
purposeful. It is certainly the case that one can be unhappy in his or her
work life and happy in his or her love life, but dissatisfaction with work
warrants attention because the ripple effect can be damaging. Work that

feels exploitive (of you or others) or that you have chosen because it was
someone else’s dream for you can be incredibly draining, compromising
your self-esteem and outlook on life. There can be subtle yet powerful ways
that work influences love and love influences work, so bringing your
awareness to that intersection can be illuminating. Ask yourself: How does
my work shape my current experience of my love life? How does the current
status of my love life impact my work?
If your work is negatively affecting your love life, it is worth asking
yourself: What is the story I am telling myself about working this job I
hate? What is getting in the way of me making a change? What feels
frightening about imagining making a change?
The opening quote of this lesson invites us to think about what we will
do with this one wild and precious life. A fulfilling intimate relationship
certainly tops most of our lists, as love is a rich source of meaning. But love
is not our only source, and we need to find purpose through passions,
through friendships, and through work. Being committed to living with
passion serves you now and always, and it serves love too.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
In the creation of a “we,” devote time, space, and energy to the “me.”

Life Playlist
Here’s a throwback reference for you. In
the 1990s TV show Ally McBeal, Ally
was going through a difficult time, and
her therapist told her that she needed a
theme song for her life. This episode
stayed with me because, for so many of
us, music plays a sacred role in our
emotional and relational lives. I can’t
say that I have one theme song for my

life. What I do have is a playlist that I
can use as needed. I rely on music to:

• Honor and deepen a sad feeling I am
moving through
• Energize me when I feel low
• Embolden me before an important event
• Connect me with others (family dance
party)
• Transition me to special couple time
(wink, wink)

Music can help you tap into your source,
connecting you to what fuels, drives,
and sustains you. Do you have a theme
song? What songs are on your life
playlist? If you don’t already use music
in this way, identify some songs you
connect with and use them when you
need to deepen or shift what’s going on
inside of you.
What’s on Your Platter?
Because how you take care of yourself
has a direct impact on your love life, it
is worth taking a look at what’s on your

platter. Doctors David Rock and Daniel
Siegel (2011) created the Healthy Mind
Platter as a takeoff on the United States
government’s revamped food pyramid.
Rather than focusing on the foods we
eat, the Healthy Mind Platter identifies
seven daily activities that “make up the
full set of ‘mental nutrients’ that your
brain needs to function at its best.” The
seven are:

• Focus time (to be goal-oriented)
• Playtime (to be spontaneous and
creative)
• Connecting time (to connect self to
others and/or self to nature)
• Physical time (to move our bodies)
• Time in (to reflect inward)
• Down time (to be nonfocused and/or to
recharge)
• Sleep time (zzzz)

When you engage in each of these
activities daily, “you enable your brain
to coordinate and balance its activities,

which strengthens your brain’s internal
connections and your connections with
other people” (2011).
There are no specific guidelines for how
much time makes up “a serving” of each
of these. Think about how you spent
your time during the past three days by
answering the following questions.

How much of each of these mental
nutrients did you get?
Were any omitted altogether, showing you
which areas of your life you are currently
neglecting? Which do you need more of?
How could you shift your priorities in
order to dedicate time to areas in which
you are “malnourished”?

Tapping Your Source
What do you feel passionate about?
Write down three hobbies or other
activities that have been or are part of
your life, and then answer the following
questions:

Which mental nutrients do these activities
give you?

How do you feel when you are engaged
in these activities?
What do these activities say about you as
a person?
How do you feel when these activities are
not part of your daily, weekly, monthly, or
annual routine?
What is the relationship between your
love life and your passion? In what ways
does (or could) your area of passion
serve, help, or bolster your intimate
relationship?

Note: If your activity or passion isn’t
creative, take a moment to think about
the role of creativity in your life. Many
of us (myself included) have a story of
self that says, “I am not creative.” In
fact, all of us are, and we are most
whole and connected when we are
involved in a creative process of some
kind. Feeding your creativity feeds your
intimate relationship. Creativity is
defined very broadly here: building,
decorating, writing, dancing, gardening,
cooking, repairing, singing, landscaping,
and so on. In what ways do you honor
creativity in your life?

The “Me” in “We”
Have you had the experience of feeling
threatened by or judgmental about your
intimate partner’s hobby or activity? If
so, answer the following questions in a
journal entry:

What are the feelings you experienced in
relation to your partner’s hobby (anger,
envy, sadness)?
In what ways are these feelings tied to the
core issues you identified in Lesson 2?
Does this issue remind you of a dynamic
or a story from your past?
What does your triggered feeling tell you
about the state of the relationship?

Have you had the experience of an
intimate partner feeling threatened by or
feeling judgmental about your passion,
hobby, or favorite activity? If so, answer
the following questions in a journal
entry:

How did you feel when you were faced
with your partner’s judgment about your

passion?
How did you handle your partner’s
judgmental feelings?
Were you able to see ways that your
partner’s judgments reflected his or her
core issues? Are you able to see that
now?
What might help you honor both your
partner’s core issue and your need to
pursue your passion?

Part 3

Self-Expression

Lesson 11

Inhabit Your Body
Erotic intimacy holds the double promise of finding oneself and losing
oneself. It is an experience of merger and of total self-absorption, of
mutuality and selfishness.
—Esther Perel

The body. Oh, the body! A book about self-awareness in the service of
love must make space for the body. Touch, affection, and sex are integral
aspects of being human, and they are essential forms of communication
within an intimate relationship. Giving and receiving pleasure through the
body grows, reflects, and sustains love. All touch, but especially sexual
touch, requires a willingness to get naked—emotionally and physically—
putting us in contact with deep truths about who we are and who we want to
be. Although touch happens in the space between two people, happy sex
begins with a compassionate and loving relationship with the self.
Therefore, this lesson is about how to know and appreciate your erotic self
—who you are sexually—in order to maximize your enjoyment of sex as a
vital element of an intimate relationship.
For starters, you need to know what emotions you’re bringing into bed
with you. The bawdy and bodacious actress Mae West famously referred to
sex as “emotion in motion.” In fact, all touch—cuddling, affectionate touch,
and sexual touch—is emotion in motion. Touch is an avenue for
manifesting, embodying, and expressing to and with another person what
we are feeling on the inside. Like an iceberg, the above-the-surface aspects
of touch appear rather straightforward—a body in connection with another
body. But there’s a whole lot more happening beneath the surface. Touch is
both simple and complicated. Our reactions to touching and being touched
can be quite profound, and our reactions offer us direct access to our
deepest longings, stories, hopes, fears, and truths. Our reactions to touching
and being touched are full of data that deserves our attention.

Like most aspects of our intimate lives, how we react to touch dates
back to a time long before we were sexually active. As mammals, touch
feeds, nurtures, and shapes us from our first breath to our last. The touch we
received (or didn’t) from our caregivers taught us potent lessons about
worthiness, closeness, safety, and soothing. If we were touched in ways that
were gentle and respectful, our bodies learned to feel safe and relaxed in the
presence of others. If touch was absent, minimal, or disrespectful, our
bodies learned to feel defensive and on edge in the presence of others.
Later, as sexuality blossoms, those early experiences are the template
upon which our journey into sexual touch maps. Sex becomes another
venue for expressing ourselves, and sex is another way of feeling close to
others and feeling valued by them. Yet sex never replaces our continued
need and desire for affectionate touch and cozy touch. Kissing hello and
good-bye, snuggling on the couch while watching a movie, holding hands
during a walk—these kinds of physical interactions are related to and
separate from sexual touch. All avenues of touch entwine, and all have a
place.
How have you experienced touch in your life? Telling your “touch
story” is illuminative and healing, and you will be supported in doing so at
the end of this lesson. Although sexual intimacy is an important element of
an intimate relationship, it is an element that is tender and complicated. We
will never eliminate the complexities of sexual intimacy—and we wouldn’t
want to—but self-awareness helps us navigate those intricacies.

Self-Aware Sex
Having a brave relationship with your sexual self is the work of a lifetime.
Because our bodies and our minds are ever-changing, who we are sexually
continues to develop from adolescence to old age. The work of sexual selfawareness simply can’t ever be done, because we are moving targets. In
addition, it is very difficult to be whole-hearted and self-aware sexually in a
culture that has a confusing relationship with sex. In lesson 6 we explored
how cultural messages shape how we feel about ourselves. The messages
we receive about who we should be sexually are loud and, quite frankly,
incoherent. Companies use sex to sell everything from cars to hamburgers.
Pornography can be accessed from our phones in the blink of an eye,

anywhere, anytime. Religious institutions, schools, and families tend to talk
about sex in simplistic black-and-white terms that leave no room for the
many shades of gray that we tend to feel when it comes to sex. In this
chaotic atmosphere, it is really hard to hear what is inside of us.
How many of us have received a wholehearted and comprehensive
sexual education? Most of the clients I work with and students I teach have
simply never been granted time and space to understand themselves
sexually. The lucky ones learned the basics about reproduction, STIs, sexual
assault, and sexual abuse, but that curriculum leaves much unsaid. It’s still
about taking information in from the outside, rather than being taught how
to listen to yourself from the inside. When it comes to sex, there are so
many questions that can be answered from one place and one place only:
within you. These worthwhile questions include:
How does my relationship with my body affect how I feel sexually?
How do I define “sexy”?
What turns me on?
What are the ingredients for a “good” and fulfilling sexual
experience with another person?
What do I believe about the role of sex in an intimate relationship?
Each and every one of us deserves the opportunity to think about, and to
feel about, these kinds of questions.
But the journey can’t stop there. In an intimate relationship, two people,
each with their own sexual story and sexual template, create something
together. That creation is informed by each individual’s desires, ideas, and
beliefs. As the quote from Esther Perel, author of Mating in Captivity:
Unlocking Erotic Intelligence, at the beginning of this lesson suggests, sex
is simultaneously selfish and selfless (2007). It’s a conversation of sorts
with self and other, at the very same time. The quality of your
“conversation” with your partner is shaped by the quality of the
conversation you are having with yourself. And the conversation that your
partner is having with him- or herself surely shapes your sexual experience

too! Therefore, it is an important relationship skill to be able to listen to
your partner’s sexual truths.
A client recently shared with me that he tried to open up to his wife
about a sexual worry he was having. He felt it was taking longer for him to
become erect, and his erection was feeling “less reliable” to him. He
reported that she responded by giggling and rolling her eyes. It seems that
his vulnerable self-disclosure triggered discomfort in her, leading her to
respond in a dismissive way. Even when it feels uncomfortable to meet your
partner’s sexual truth with openness, intimacy depends on your ability to do
so. My hope is that she will explore the story she began to tell herself when
she was confronted by what he shared.
Sexual self-awareness is vital, as it lays the foundation for the creation
of self-aware sex—sex that is mindful, intentional, and conscious. Sex that
is brave! Here are some qualities that capture a self-aware sexual
experience:
I am in the present moment (versus lost in the past or worrying
about what’s next).
I am in touch with my body.
I feel able to communicate what I want and need.
I feel emotionally and physically connected to myself.
I feel emotionally and physically connected to my partner.
In contrast, here are some qualities of a sexual experience that happens
in the absence of self-awareness:
I am lost in the past. (Memories are troubling me.)
I am worried about the future or distracted by other thoughts.
I am not in touch with my body. (I am not sure what I am feeling… I
am under the influence of alcohol or drugs that compromise my
ability to “hear” myself.)

I don’t feel able to communicate what I want and need (because I
am afraid, self-conscious, or uncomfortable, or because I don’t
know how).
I am not emotionally connected with myself. (I am pushing down
my emotions… I feel emotionally numb.)
I am not emotionally connected with my partner. (I feel distant,
disengaged, or emotionally unsafe.)
These are qualities to ponder rather than hard-and-fast rules, and they
are offered in the service of reflection. Moving toward creating and
engaging in sexual experiences that are brave, mindful, intentional, and
conscious begins by naming what is getting in your way. For the rest of this
lesson, we will explore some practices that can move you toward greater
sexual self-awareness. The “Guide to Self-Aware Sex” at
http://www.newharbinger.com/35814 contains tips, suggestions, and
additional resources for a happy and healthy sex life.
Question Hookup Culture
In my work with young adults in the classroom and the therapy room, I
spend a lot of time talking about “hookup culture,” and, as it is usually
practiced today, hookup culture is a barrier to brave and self-aware sex. By
way of definition, a hookup has three elements:
A hookup includes some form of sexual intimacy, anything from
kissing to oral, vaginal, or anal sex—and everything in between.
The term “hooking up” is an enormous and intentionally vague
umbrella.
A hookup is brief. It can be as short as a few minutes to as long as
several hours during a single night.
A hookup is intended to be purely physical in nature and involves
both parties shutting down any communication or connection that
might lead to emotional attachment. (Freitas 2013, 25)

Hooking up is not new. My friends and I engaged in a hookup or two
while we were college students in the 1990s…while wearing oversize
flannel and listening to Pearl Jam. But today’s young adults have taken it to
a whole new level. It seems that today’s hookups involve more alcohol—
students often talk about being “blackout drunk” as if it’s normal or
common. It seems that today’s hookups involve more sex (versus a dancefloor makeout). Finally, it seems that hooking up is the predominant form of
coupling, whereas in the 1990s we saw lots of couples in exclusive or
committed relationships (Solomon 2016).
A number of forces converge to create and maintain hookup culture:
People are getting married later than ever and therefore simply have
more years to explore multiple intimate relationships.
There is a sense of doubt and fear regarding the institution of
marriage that can lead people to seek casual and brief relationships.
Living in the digital age profoundly shapes every aspect of our
intimate relationships, offering us the illusion that we can keep our
relationships neat and tidy by handling much of the business of love
via social media. Behind our screens, we can ponder, edit, and plan.
Face-to-face, we cannot.
Hookups feel like an extension of the wish that love could be simple
and easy—and therefore not painful. Hookup culture reflects a fear of
getting entangled, a fear of getting hurt, and a fear of screwing up. In this
way, hookup culture is an effort to stay emotionally safe, reflecting and
perpetuating anxiety, ambivalence, and pessimism about love.
But there is a cost that comes along with clinging to a story that love
ought to be “chill.” When you operate under this belief, you are required to
ignore the many emotional layers that exist beneath the facade of “chill.”
Woven into the story of the hookup scene is shame when someone “catches
feelings.” To catch feelings is to fail! When I am talking with students or
clients, and they express disappointment and shame that they fell for the
person they were supposed to be just hooking up with, my response tends to
be, “Of course you did! Sex is powerful magic.” We fancy ourselves to be
high-tech and evolved, but we are hardwired to emotionally connect to

those whose bodies we dive into via sex. Orgasm triggers oxytocin, the
“cuddle hormone” of attachment, so it is cruel to reprimand yourself for
catching feelings despite your intention to keep it easy breezy. The very
situation has you set up to fail!
A hookup is usually neither a cocreated nor an honest contract. Often
both people are drunk and/or high during the hookup, and, as mentioned
above, being under the influence of alcohol or drugs compromises your
ability to fully participate in a sexual experience. It can even compromise
the ability to affirmatively give and receive sexual consent, meaning that a
hookup can be more than just unconscious or mindless. It can be a sexual
assault.
A hookup is also not a cocreated and honest contract when intentions
are misaligned. Many people (especially women) have shared with me that
hooking up feels like the only avenue into an intimate relationship. People
participate in a hookup in the hope that an intimate relationship will result
—giving sex to get love. Sometimes hooking up does lead to an intimate
relationship. However, since disconnection from self seems to be a
prerequisite to hooking up, this gamble seems awfully risky.
It is, of course, possible to create conscious, aligned, and authentic
sexual experiences outside of the context of a committed intimate
relationship. From a place of self-awareness, you may choose to engage in a
sexual experience in the service of adventure, curiosity, play, and/or growth.
This is different than hookup sex. A student of mine, Mitch, is an example
of this.
Despite having his family’s support and the support of his friends when
he came out as gay in high school, Mitch spent his college years on an
emotional roller coaster. He felt “obsessed” with the idea that he shouldn’t
hook up because that would fulfill the stereotype of the promiscuous gay
guy. Instead, he thought he ought to only be interested in a serious intimate
relationship. But he struggled to find a guy to date, so he would get drunk,
make out with someone, and then feel awful about it for weeks.
Today, at twenty-four years old, Mitch is still single, and he decided to
experiment with casual sex. He met someone on a hookup app. Before
meeting, they talked on the phone and said out loud to each other that all
they were interested in was sex—they cocreated an honest contract. He
went to his house completely sober. They talked for a few minutes and then

had sex. “I was interested in my experience,” Mitch told me. “If he had fun
too, that was even better, but this was about me. If the sex was bad or if I
felt uncomfortable at any point, I knew I could have stopped it and left. I’d
never have to see him again if I didn’t want to. It turned out to be a great
experience that helped me understand myself better sexually. Afterward, I
got in my car, called my best friend, and declared, ‘I’m in my sexual
renaissance.’” Mitch’s experience has all the elements of a self-aware
sexual experience even though it occurred outside of a committed intimate
relationship.
Love Your Body
Body image concerns pull you out of your present-moment experience,
dampening the pleasures of sex. Celebrating the body you live in, exactly as
it is today, can help you leave your self-critical voice behind so you can
show up for fun! Our minds and bodies are intricately connected, so
judgmental thoughts about yourself—“My belly is too fat”; “My hips are
too wide”—get in the way of physical pleasure. Stopping negative self-talk
is easier said than done, but recognizing that you are having negative
thoughts is a vital first step! You are not your thoughts, so start by naming
negative thoughts as they creep in during sex. For example, you have the
thought, “My belly is so fat.” Train yourself to have this thought next: “I am
not the negative thought I just had.”
Once you have recognized that you are having a negative thought, you
can make the choice to transform it. You will have to play around and see
what works for you. Perhaps imagine plucking the negative thought like a
weed and sending it down a river. Replace the thought with a loving and
affirming thought about yourself (such as “I am strong,” “I am worthy,” or
“I am beautiful”), and bring your attention back to the present moment. Feel
your partner’s skin against yours. Focus on where your body is feeling
pleasure, and imagine that feeling growing and spreading through your
body. When it comes to sex, there are plenty of exciting places to put your
attention—places more worthy of your attention than negative self talk!
Shed Old Sexual Stories

If you grew up being told that sex is bad, dangerous, or dirty, those old
stories can play in your head during sex, making it difficult to let go and
seek out or surrender to pleasurable sensations. Much as we did earlier in
this lesson with negative self-talk about body image, it is really helpful to
name those stories as such—old stories that once had a time and a place in
your life but that do not serve you in the context of your intimate
relationship today. Create a new story for yourself about how good sex
enhances your life. You are entitled to pleasure, play, escape, and erotic
connection with another person.
Own Your Pleasure
Unfortunately, it’s difficult for many of us to feel entitled to pleasure.
Feeling good can feel bad. Sometimes old messages about seeking pleasure
as greedy, selfish, and “too much” can make you feel bad about wanting to
feel good. If you feel uncomfortable declaring that you are worthy of
pleasure, you may not feel okay doing what it takes to understand how your
body works and what feels good for you, and this may manifest in
hesitation around exploring masturbation or giving feedback to your
partner.
For a number of reasons, women are especially at risk of minimizing the
importance of their own pleasure. They may wait silently and passively for
an orgasm to arrive. They may end up faking an orgasm because they feel
guilty about how long it’s taking or ashamed of not being able to get there.
Faking orgasms is an attempted solution to a difficult problem but with
unintended consequences. People usually fake orgasms in order to keep the
peace and/or to protect their partner’s feelings, both of which are noble
intentions. Even if your faked orgasm smoothes the moment over, the longterm consequences can include compromised sexual desire, resentment, and
a nagging sense of dishonesty in your intimate relationship.
You deserve to learn what works for your body, and you deserve to be
able to talk with your partner about what makes you feel good. If
advocating for yourself sexually feels frightening, embarrassing, or hurtful,
return to the previous practice (Shed Old Sexual Stories)and uproot the old
story that supports the idea that silently waiting or faking beats selfadvocacy.

Be Discerning About Erotic Materials
Reaching for erotic materials is common. Pornography is a multibilliondollar industry, and the Fifty Shades of Grey series of books has sold more
than one hundred million copies worldwide (Bosman 2014). Throw in
Nicholas Sparks books and movies, and you’ve got the economy of a small
nation! What fuels our desire to turn outside of ourselves and our
relationship for sexual inspiration and arousal is a book unto itself. When a
sexual partner is unavailable, erotic materials can fill a void. When couples
are curious to explore, watching something sexy together can reduce selfconsciousness and heighten excitement. But caution is warranted, as much
of the readily available, high-speed Internet pornography shows sex that is
coercive, dehumanizing, and antirelationship. What we consume affects us,
shaping how we experience ourselves, our desires, and our relationships.
Stay in close contact with your gut as you consume erotic material,
carefully tracking how you feel emotionally within your body. Erotic
materials ought to enhance rather than replace intimate sex.
Be Flexible
Sexual desire ebbs and flows in an intimate relationship, and even very
happy couples experience peaks and valleys in desire caused by everything
from long work hours to the demands of parenting to age-related physical
changes. There is no magic number for how often couples “should” have
sex, and quality counts—not just quantity. Appreciate when sex is
satisfying and bountiful, and be compassionate with yourself and your
partner when it is not.
Although the partner whose desire is compromised can feel that he or
she is to blame, low sexual desire in one or both partners is best viewed as a
couples problem and addressed together as such. Low sexual desire that
goes beyond normal relationship ebb and flow is a problem that tends not to
resolve on its own, so be proactive and address it. Appendix 2 includes
resources to help you find a therapist specifically trained to address sexual
problems.

The Playground

Our cultural story is that sex ought to be easy. If we base our sexual
expectations on the images and messages we see around us—the covers of
magazines that promise three tricks for maximum pleasure or the steamy
sex scenes we see in movies—we are at risk of feeling somehow wrong or
deficient. We are at risk of feeling as though we don’t measure up and
judging ourselves harshly. In the real world, sex is complicated! Old stories
can compromise our sex drive. Negative self-talk can block pleasure. Stress
can make us feel downright unsexy. Plus, sex is created by two people
together, so also in the mix are all of our partner’s core issues and stories.
The erotic self is sneaky, subtle, and ever-changing, and the erotic self
deserves attention and understanding. When partners are emotionally able
to do what it takes to create self-aware sex, sex within an intimate
relationship can feel like a playground—a safe and exciting space of selfexpression that connects you to yourself, your partner, and all of life itself.
When partners are unable to connect with themselves and each other, sex
within an intimate relationship can feel a whole lot more like a war zone,
fraught with all kinds of danger. Committing ourselves to self-awareness
and self-compassion puts us on the path toward meeting each other on that
playground, where sexual intimacy creates and sustains good feelings
within and between partners. Whether a couple commits to sexual
monogamy or creates another kind of sexual boundary that allows for
sexual experiences with other people, the foundation of happy sex within an
intimate relationship is self-awareness.
Sex is developmental. How you relate to sex at twenty is not the same as
how you relate to sex at forty, and it’s not the same as how you relate to sex
at sixty. As you grow and change, what is possible for you sexually grows
and changes as well. What remains true throughout your sexual journey is
that your erotic self deserves the same brave exploration and illumination as
all other aspects of your relational self. I believe that for all of us, the
default setting is that the erotic self is a vital element of our humanity.
“Stuff” gets in the way, for sure—traumatic experiences, cultural messages,
and self-esteem and body image concerns can make it difficult to claim
what is our birthright. Yet, the desire to touch and be touched, to give and
receive pleasure, is universal.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Love is embodied—experienced within and expressed by your body. Knowing
and embracing your erotic self fuels your intimate relationship.

Your Touch Story
Use the Name-Connect-Choose process
to expand your awareness about your
sexual self.

• Name: Reflect on your relationship with
touch. In order to allow the right
hemisphere of your brain to offer a
variety of images and memories, begin
this exercise in meditation. Sit quietly,
close your eyes, and set an intention to
explore your history with touch,
especially affectionate touch. Journey
through the chapters of your life: when
you were with your family as a young
child, when you were at school and with
friends, when you were in your first few
intimate relationships.
• Connect: As images and memories
come up, notice what happens in your
body: Comfort? Excitement? Fear?
Warmth? Love? Be present with those
feelings, allowing them to be exactly as
they are. As you finish your meditation,
jot down some notes about the
meditation.

• Choose: How do those early images,
stories, and experiences live within you
today? What is the impact on you today?
Which aspects of your touch story would
you like to embrace and keep alive within
you today? Which aspects would you like
to release because they no longer serve
you?

Sex Education
Reflect on how you learned about sex as
you were growing up by answering the
following questions:

How did your family educate you (or not)
about sex?
How was sex talked about (or not) in your
house?
What cultural stories about sex affect
your relationship to your sexual self?
Are there religious and/or gendered
messages about who you “should” be
sexually that serve you well?
To what extent have you internalized
messages about who you “should” be
sexually that you would be better off

without? How would you feel about your
erotic self without those internalized
messages?

Sexual Healing
Reflect on the most positive sexual
experience that you have had in your
life so far. Be specific in your mind
about where you were, the person you
were with, and what happened before,
during, and after. Then write down some
words and phrases in response to the
following questions:

How did you feel within your body?
How did you feel about your partner?
What ingredients (setting, music, mood,
and so forth) were in place that made the
experience so great?
What could you do to carry the essence of
that experience into future sexual
experiences?

The Map of Your Body

Without deep awareness and
understanding of how your body
experiences sexual pleasure, your ability
to experience sexual pleasure with
another will likely be compromised.
Make a list of your erogenous zones—
the parts of your body or the areas of
your body where you enjoy being
touched—and the types of touch (light,
deep, rhythmic) that feel good in those
areas. Notice your gut reactions as you
reflect on this.
If it was difficult to find much to say
about how your body experiences
pleasure, perhaps you would benefit
from learning more about your erotic
self. If you have never masturbated, or if
you are very uncomfortable touching
your own body, reflect on what that is
about for you by completing the
sentence: “Masturbation is.…” Notice
your gut reactions as you fill in that
sentence.
Finally, respond to the following
questions:

Is there a story (a cultural story, a family
story, or a story that you created) that
prevents you from exploring your own
body?

Does that story constrain you in your
sexual experiences with others?
If masturbation is framed as an avenue to
self-understanding, self-acceptance, and
self-love in the service of love with
another, does this change your story at
all?

Pornography and You
Complete this sentence: “Pornography
is.…” Reflect on your response. If you
would like to explore this aspect of
yourself more deeply, answer the
following questions:

What is the impact of your use of
pornography on your intimate
relationships?
In what ways does pornography enhance
you sexually? (For example, it helps you
feel less self-conscious or increases your
arousal.)
In what ways does it get in the way for
you sexually? (For example, it makes you
feel more self-conscious or makes your
expectations rigid or unrealistic.)

Note: If you have only or mostly
masturbated with pornography and/or if
you feel there’s something problematic
about your use of pornography (such as
using frequently or using images that are
violent, coercive, or disturbing), it is
worth bravely addressing the impact
pornography has on you.

Lesson 12

Honor the Space Between
Sometimes, when we’re lying together, I look at her and I feel dizzy with
the realization that here is another distinct person from me, who has
memories, origins, thoughts, feelings that are different from my own.
—Barack Obama

Whatever your politics, this quote is phenomenal. I have used it time and
time again in my teaching because Barack Obama’s words capture a vital
aspect of love: honoring the space between self and other. In an intimate
relationship, you are invited and challenged to hold on to yourself while
connecting deeply with another person. In moments of peace, this is easy to
do, but in moments of conflict and misunderstanding, this is no small task.
But we must try to remember that love is a classroom. The space between
self and other is a crucible, a container in which transformation occurs.
Your words and actions shape me, and at the very same time my words and
actions shape you.

The Thing About Conflict
The thing about conflict is that it’s 100 percent inevitable. As my friend and
colleague, Dr. Anthony Chambers, says, “The central task of any intimate
relationship is the management of difference.” Our experiences with our
beloveds run the gamut from butterflies-in-my-stomach excitement to
seeing-red angry. We simply can’t have one without the other. Love is too
rich and complex to allow us to pick and choose our emotions.
Building a life with someone is multifaceted. The same person you have
mind-blowing sex with turns out to be the same person you share a bank
account and a closet with. And that stuff can get really irritating! The best
we can ever do is learn to deal lovingly with the frustrating and painful
moments so that we can return as quickly as possible to a place of intimacy

and friendship. Being truly brave means also trusting that conflict has
within it the potential to deepen intimate connection by granting us the
opportunity to know ourselves and our partner in a more vulnerable and
authentic way. That’s quite a dialectic: conflict sucks and conflict catalyzes
growth. I don’t know anybody who can hold that perspective all the time,
but being able to catch glimpses of that both/and can make fighting more
tolerable.
The story you tell yourself about conflict shapes your experience of it.
The stories that people tell about conflict are so vital that every couples
therapist addresses those stories in some way, shape, or form with every
couple he or she sees, always. Regardless of how couples therapists are
trained, one of the goals they will have for every couple they work with is
to help the couple tell stories about their conflicts in a way that maximizes
intimacy and minimizes blame and shame. The goal is to move from linear
conflict stories to systemic conflict stories. But what exactly is the
difference?
Linear Conflict Stories
When we tell a linear conflict story, we focus on cause and effect. “You
did this to me.” “I did this to you.” Linear conflict stories tend to be
simplistic and goal oriented, and the goal is usually to assign credit or
blame: naming who the victim is, who had the worst behavior, whose fault
it is. A linear conflict story is driven by all-or-nothing thinking, and the end
result tends to be “zero sum,” meaning that there is one so-called winner
and one so-called loser. All of us are at risk of slipping into this kind of
black-and-white storytelling, especially when we are upset. It’s not
altogether surprising. Our culture is full of examples of finger-pointing—
from the endless tension between Democrats and Republicans to news
stories that speak simplistically about victims and villains. We also are
drawn to easy answers in an effort to conserve mental energy, as ambiguity
and shades of gray simply require more work.
Telling a linear conflict story opens the door to a particular set of
feelings, and that particular set of feelings tends to be relationally
damaging:
“You did this to me” opens the door to anger and hurt.

“I did this to you” opens the door to shame.
Yes, we are responsible for our actions, always. And, blame and shame
tend to be very corrosive elements in any relationship, including an intimate
relationship. Let’s look at clients of mine, Marius and Scarlett:
Marius came into my office furious with Scarlett. He said to her, “I
cannot believe you went into my e-mail to find out if I sent my résumé to
that job posting! How could you do this to me? You are nosy, and you
betrayed my trust big-time.” Marius’s story is blaming (Scarlett betrayed his
trust by searching his e-mail) and it goes in only one direction (Scarlett did
something to him). This is an example of a linear conflict story.
Systemic Conflict Stories
On the other hand, when we tell a systemic story about the conflict in a
relationship, the storyline is much more curvaceous. The narrative moves in
a back-and-forth way, more a circle than a line. Declaring who started the
fight is irrelevant because the storyteller bravely and humbly holds the
awareness that both participate in the creation of this cyclical dance, and
both feel hurt and misunderstood by the impact of it. Sidestepping the
language of blame and shame, a systemic conflict story opts for keen
observations about “the degree to which I do ‘this’ is the degree to which
you do ‘that.’” As Dr. Susan Johnson (2008) puts it: “The more I
________________, the more you ________________, and then the more I
________________, and round and round we go” (88).
In a systemic conflict story, the storyteller keeps an eye on the space
between self and other. The space between self and other is the we, and it is
a third entity. The we requires a story thick enough and wide enough to hold
the nuances of “my stuff,” “your stuff,” and “our stuff.”
When we make the brave and difficult choice to stand in a systemic
conflict story, we acknowledge that very little about intimate relationships
is solvable anyway. A preeminent researcher and therapist, Dr. John
Gottman, has found that a whopping 69 percent of the time, couples fight
about a perpetual (rather than fixable) problem, so the goal is dialogue, not
resolution (2011). Rather than simple fixing, most of the conflicts that a

couple faces require navigation—skillfully and lovingly moving through in
a way that minimizes damage.
Returning to the example of Marius and Scarlett, here’s how it would
sound if Marius had told a systemic conflict story: “I feel awful and
embarrassed about my current unemployment, which leads me to withdraw
and shut down, avoiding your questions. The more I shut down and
withdraw, the more you feel alone and out in the cold. The more you feel
abandoned by me, the more you pester me or resort to sneaky things like
searching my e-mail in order to get information. The more you try to dig for
information, the more I feel embarrassed and paralyzed, and round and
round we go. We both play a part in this and we both feel awful about it.”
Systemic conflict stories don’t give you the primal satisfaction of
destroying, triumphing, and conquering, but they help you avoid the pain of
being crushed, obliterated, and victimized. Systemic conflict stories have
breath and space, as they are told from a stance slightly above the fray—
what Dr. Dan Wile, creator of Collaborative Couple Therapy (2002), calls a
“second tier in the relationship, an observing post, a metalevel, a joint
platform, an observing couple ego” (287). Systemic conflict stories
transcend and transform.
Linear Conflict Stories

Systemic Conflict Stories

Zero sum (I win/you lose.)

What does the relationship need?

Cause and effect

Cycles/dances/circles

It’s my fault/It’s your fault.

The more I do “this,” the more you do “that.”

I can only see one next move.

I can see many possible next moves.

Shame or blame

Curiosity and sadness that we are fighting

The Marriage Hack

Northwestern University psychology professor Dr. Finkel and his
colleagues (2013a) conducted a study that captures just how good systemic
conflict stories are for an intimate relationship. Their so-called “marriage
hack” experiment (2013b) involved recruiting 120 happy and recently
married (for less than five years) couples. In the first year of the study,
every four months, participants wrote about the most significant fight they
had had in the previous four months.
In the second year of the study, the researchers divided the couples into
two groups. The control group continued with the same plan (once every
four months, they wrote about their most significant fight). The
experimental group wrote a summary of their most significant fight as well,
but in addition they wrote about the conflict from the perspective of a
neutral third person who wants the best for both partners. They were asked
to also include, if possible, a single positive aspect to the fight. The
researchers wanted this second group to be able to keep this “outsider
perspective” in mind all year long, so they also asked these couples to write
about what might get in the way of them adopting this neutral third point of
view during future fights and what they could do to keep that from
happening. These additional writing prompts took each person in the second
group about twenty-one extra minutes during the course of the year.
The results were amazing! Most studies about marriage unfortunately
show that relationship satisfaction declines during the first year of marriage,
and data from the couples in both groups showed that. But differences
between the two groups emerged in the second year of the study. The
couples in the control group, the ones who just wrote about their fights,
continued to show declining levels of relationship satisfaction, whereas the
couples in the second group, the ones who adopted the outsider perspective
(a systemic conflict story), showed no additional decline and reported their
fights were less distressing over time. Systemic conflict stories work!

Too Many Toothbrushes
My friend and mentor, Dr. Cheryl Rampage, has a great way of talking
about how the shift from linear to systemic storytelling has helped her
marriage. She says that early in her marriage, when she was in conflict with
her husband, her story was about how much she couldn’t stand him. Later,

she became able to tell a story about how much she couldn’t stand this
moment. I have found this really helpful when I need to work with the story
I am telling myself about the conflict in my marriage. Here’s an example:
One evening, I sat in bed stewing. I had conjured up in my head a real
doozy of a linear conflict story, and I was going to let Todd have it. I wasn’t
just angry, I was righteously angry. You know that kind of anger—the kind
that makes you feel entitled and 100 percent sure you’re right. I don’t even
know what triggered me—an unwashed dish or seeing him on his
BlackBerry perhaps. What was in my head felt like a well-reasoned, logical
argument outlining exactly how much I was doing around the house, how
hard I was working, and how unappreciated I was. My story would show
just how much he was wronging me.
He walked in, and I started up. My angry eruption put him on the
defensive immediately. He managed to make some attempts to validate my
emotions, to point out what he has been doing, and to remind me about the
demands of his work life. Back and forth we went for a few minutes until
our son, Brian, walked into the room. He had had a nightmare and wanted
to sleep on the floor in our room. We made him a nest on the floor and
headed into the bathroom to finish our argument.
The interruption had been enough of a jolt that I was beginning to view
this fight a little differently. I was starting to see just how linear my conflict
story was. It was simplistic, full of blame, and, worst of all, it was treating
Todd as a threat that needed to be conquered rather than as the ally and
friend I knew him to be. My righteous anger was starting to feel more like
sadness. I also began to remember how unsolvable the problem really was.
We were both busy. Life with two children was demanding, stressful, and
tiring. We both were trying hard. Despite my initial cockiness that I had a
new angle on an old problem, our fight was showing me that, in fact, this
was a stale retread, and we were, as Dr. Dan Siegel calls it, “lost in a
familiar place.” I still loved this man, but I didn’t love the moment we were
in. I could see how the more I blamed him, the more he defended himself,
and we were getting nowhere.
This shift toward a systemic conflict story was helping me, but what
eluded me was how to make a graceful exit from this place neither of us
wanted to be. My ego and pride were making it difficult to just express
compassion for him, compassion for myself, and an apology for my harsh

words and tone. So there we were, frustrated and confused, leaning against
the sink, contemplating our next moves. Out of the corner of my eye, I
noticed our toothbrush holder. Despite the fact that we are the only two
people who use this bathroom, no fewer than eight toothbrushes were
crammed into it. Impulsively, I took the leap from frustration to curiosity,
hoping that he would join me.
“Why the eff do we have so many toothbrushes?” We both smiled, and
the tension began to melt. “Which one is yours?”
“The green one,” he said.
“That can’t be right,” I said. “The green one is mine.”
“I know,” he said matter-of-factly. “You usually wake up earlier that I
do, and I like yours because it’s moist.”
And scene. I was done! I broke into peals of laughter, surrendering
myself to the never-ending paradox that is love. Nothing was solved that
night. No answer was the final one. And I learned that, almost twenty years
into a marriage, you can discover that there is a “marital toothbrush.” No
linear story can withstand this much nonsense, and through that fight, our
relationship showed me, yet again, that the only possible story that can hold
this degree of complexity is a systemic one.
Like all couples, Todd and I deserve gentleness, as we have valiantly
attempted to work out a division of labor in order to meet the needs of our
household—we need income, we need caretaking, we need to run the
house, we need to be able to pursue our ambitions, we need to honor our
individual passions, and we need time together. It will never be perfect, and
it will never be done. I can advocate for my individual needs within the
context of the “we,” and so can he.
The degree to which I slip into a linear conflict story in which I am the
victim and he is the villain is the degree to which he becomes defensive and
shuts down. The degree to which I can extend compassion for myself, for
him, and for our situation is the degree to which he can stay open and
connected to me. A systemic conflict story invites us to sit shoulder-toshoulder and look together at the challenges before us.
As spiritual teacher and bestselling author Neal Donald Walsh says,
“My perspective creates my perception.” Conflict is inevitable, but we have
lots of choices in the face of conflict, including a choice of perspective.

Because humans are emotional by nature, we will always be prone to
slipping into a linear conflict story, but we can catch ourselves and course
correct, reaching instead for a juicy systemic conflict story. From the
perspective of a systemic conflict story, our perceptions change. Foe
becomes ally. Conflict becomes a path back to compassion and curiosity…
or at least humor and surrender.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Using a systemic (rather than linear) conflict story in the face of inevitable
relationship problems is brave, helping you move through emotional pain and
setting the stage for reconnection.

Blaming and Shaming
Your core issues (identified in lesson 2)
likely dictate whether you tend more
toward blame or shame, so let’s figure
out what kind of linear conflict stories
(blame-filled or shame-filled) you tend
to tell when you are upset. The “Guide
for Moving from Reactivity to
Intimacy”
(http://www.newharbinger.com/35814)
will remind you about the differences
between linear and systemic conflict
stories. In order to get clear about where
your stories fall on the spectrum of
blame-filled to shame-filled, do the
following:

Think about the last three fights or heated
discussions or conflicts that you have
been in. For each fight, write down what

you were saying to yourself during the
fight—for example, “I can’t believe she’s
doing this to me” or “I screwed up so
badly.”
Now, review your list. Does it seem as if
you are more likely to slip into blamefilled linear conflict stories (all your
partner’s fault) or shame-filled linear
conflict stories (all your fault) when you
are upset? Perhaps you find yourself
going back and forth between shame and
blame?
Is there a connection between your linearconflict story and your core issue? For
example, someone with a core issue
related to a fear of abandonment might
slip into a shame-filled linear conflict
story (such as “I am a screwup and he’s
going to leave me.”). Someone with a
core issue related to feeling constantly
criticized might slip into a blame-filled
conflict story (such as “She isn’t listening
to me and she’s being unfair.”).

Getting a better understanding of how
you tend to talk to yourself when you
are upset will help you in the next few
lessons.
Love Hack

Whether or not you’re currently in a
relationship, try out Dr. Eli Finkel’s
“Marriage Hack” exercise.

Write about a recent fight you had with
someone you care about from the
perspective of a neutral third person who
wants the best for all involved.
Next, write about how that neutral third
person might find the good that could
come from the fight.
Finally, write down what might make it
difficult for you to adopt this neutral
third-party point of view during a future
fight.

Once you have written down your
responses, reflect on how this exercise
shifts your thoughts and feelings about
the other person and about the fight.
Share the Love
Ask the person you had the fight with to
complete the above exercise. Then, read
each other’s systemic conflict stories
and talk together about what shifted for
each of you through the writing. After
talking with this person, reflect to

yourself about how this dialogue felt
different from the fight. What do you
notice about a dialogue that is
committed to a systemic conflict story
rather than a linear one? What feels
different? Is there less defensiveness
and more curiosity?

Lesson 13

Respect the Pause
Between stimulus and response there is a space. In that space is our
power to choose our response. In our response lies our growth and our
freedom.
—Viktor Frankl

When a couple begins therapy, I ask, “What is it that is bringing you to
therapy now?” Nine times out of ten the response I hear is, “We have a
communication problem.” This description doesn’t really tell me much. It
could mean that they yell and scream, or it could mean that they move
through their home in stony silence for days on end. Author and couples
therapist Dr. Anne Brennan Malec calls communication the oxygen in an
intimate relationship (2015). It is the how of relational connection, captured
in words, tone, and gestures. Communication problems, though real, are
actually symptoms of much deeper issues at play.
By this point, you probably won’t be surprised to know that what’s most
essential when it comes to healthy intimate communication is not some
fancy set of skills. It’s relational self-awareness—the ability and willingness
to look honestly at what tends to set you off in your intimate relationship
and how you handle yourself when you feel upset. When it comes to
communication, relational self-awareness grows when we ask ourselves
questions like:
How do I handle myself when there is conflict in my intimate
relationship?
To what degree do I take responsibility for my part of the dance of
communication?
What are the assets I bring to the table in times of turmoil?

What are my biggest stumbling blocks?

The High Road and the Low Road
The quote from Austrian psychiatrist and Holocaust survivor Viktor Frankl
that opens this lesson captures an essential truth about communication—
there is always a space between stimulus and response. Always. The
stimulus is that thing out there that feels irritating, disappointing, or
infuriating—the wet towel on the bathroom floor, the text message that
seems awfully snippy, or the partner who saunters in thirty minutes late
with no apology. The response is our reaction—what we do about that thing
out there. We have zero control over the stimulus, but we have 100 percent
control over the response.
This truth is simple in concept, but it is very difficult in practice. When
someone does something that feels irritating, we tend to react quickly (think
road rage). When that someone is our intimate partner, with whom the
stakes are so high, our response can happen in the blink of an eye, and
before we know it, we have done or said something that we will soon regret
and that makes a situation go from bad to awful. It’s hard work being
human! We like to think of ourselves as evolved and sophisticated, yet
those who dedicate their lives to the study of the human brain know that
despite the brain’s amazing complexity, we can shift from sophisticated to
primitive pretty darn quickly.
The part of our brain called the limbic system, also known as the
emotional brain, has been critical to the survival of our species. It is expert
at making rough-and-dirty, instantaneous assessments of situations in order
to keep us alive. It has basically two modes: fight or flight. When
describing this part of the brain, therapist and researcher Dr. Dan Siegel
uses this analogy: You are walking in the woods when, out of the corner of
your eye, you see something that could be a stick or could be a snake. Your
emotional brain makes a split-second assessment of possible danger, your
body shifts into fight-or-flight mode, and you jump out of the way. Phew!
Your emotional brain made a decision before you could assess possible
responses, weigh pros and cons of each, and select a next step—a process
that would have proven deadly had that object you saw been a snake. So
thank goodness for the emotional brain.

Simple fight or flight is lifesaving in the deep woods, but it can be lovedestroying in the family room. Responding in this rough-and-dirty way to
our intimate partners, by either attacking (fight) or withdrawing (flight),
doesn’t promote closeness or safety. Fortunately, we have been blessed with
a cerebral cortex, also known as the new mammalian brain, and it is quite
sophisticated. One part of the cerebral cortex, the prefrontal cortex, is
located right behind the center of the forehead, the area spiritual teachers
call the “third eye.” The prefrontal cortex, which is not fully wired up until
we are twenty-five years old, can do a whole lot more than fight or flee.
This part of the brain guides higher-order skills like empathy, compassion,
wisdom, discernment, choice, and impulse control.
When we are processing the world through the prefrontal cortex, we are
on the “high road.” When we are processing the world through the limbic
system, we are on the “low road.” When faced with that infuriating
stimulus, we are at risk of responding with our emotional brain in the blink
of an eye, driving off the prefrontal cortex–guided high road and landing
squarely on the limbic-guided low road, never even noticing the precious
space between stimulus and response. The shift has happened. An
openhearted, compassionate person becomes a warrior, just like that.

In Battle
Careening down the low road, at the mercy of your limbic system, you are
in fight-or-flight mode, desperately trying to manage uncomfortable
feelings of hurt, irritation, and/or anger. Your fight-or-flight behavior is
your self-protective survival strategy (Sheinkman and Fishbane 2004)—
behavior that is designed to manage painful emotions. Generally speaking,
there are two kinds of survival strategies—volume up and volume down
(Johnson 2008). When distressed, some of us resort to turning the volume
up with fight-based survival strategies, and others of us resort to turning the
volume down with flight-based survival strategies. Both kinds of survival
tactics attempt to keep us safe—but with troubling consequences.
Fight: Volume-Up Survival Strategies

Those whose instinct is to stay and fight employ volume-up survival
strategies, ones that involve getting louder or more extreme in response to
feeling upset and threatened. Volume-up survival strategies include:
Talking louder, more, and/or faster
Yelling, “going off,” or name-calling
Threatening, giving consequences or ultimatums, retaliating, or
seeking revenge
Begging
Blaming
Repeating yourself
Criticizing
In the extreme, volume-up strategies can include hitting (your partner,
yourself, or something like a wall). When people yell as part of a volumeup strategy, in addition to their voice becoming louder, their words tend to
become “bigger” and more severe (“you always” or “you never”). They
may move from talking about this particular incident to talking about all the
times they have felt disrespected, hurt, or betrayed in the relationship.
Therapists sometimes call that kitchen sinking—bringing everything into
the conversation, including the kitchen sink.
My client, Tess, has a black belt in volume-up survival strategies! One
time, she and her boyfriend, Devon, were at a party, drinking, mingling, and
dancing. They became separated at some point, and Tess couldn’t find
Devon anywhere. After looking for ten minutes, she found him—on the
back porch talking with a very attractive woman. Tess approached Devon
and told him it was time to go. As they walked home, Tess let Devon have
it. “I cannot believe you. Who the hell was that? You are way out of
bounds. How could you embarrass me like that?” And on and on. Her
limbic system was in the driver’s seat, and she had the volume turned way
up.

Flight: Volume-down Survival Strategies
In contrast, volume-down survival strategies involve getting quieter in
order to cope with feeling triggered and include:
Shutting down or withdrawing
Walking away
Giving the silent treatment
Not answering phone calls, texts, e-mails, and the like
Sulking
Pouting
Relying on nonverbal communication: slamming doors, huffing and
puffing, rolling your eyes, crossing your arms
Volume-down strategies are a different way of taking yourself out of a
painful moment. Perhaps you withdraw because you are hurting too badly
to stay present in the face of so much pain. Perhaps you withdraw in order
to hurt the other person. Your behavior communicates, “I don’t know how
to tell you about my pain with words, so I will show you with my actions.”
Note that removing yourself from a painful situation in order to calm
down and decide how you want to proceed is not the same as using a
volume-down self-protective survival strategy. This helpful strategy is
called pressing pause. More on that later.
Return for a moment to the example of Tess and Devon and imagine
that rather than being prone to volume-up survival strategies, Tess is prone
to volume-down survival strategies. Here’s how the walk home may have
looked: As they walked, Devon reached for Tess’s hand but Tess pulled
away. Devon asked Tess what was wrong, and Tess mumbled, “I’m fine.
Just tired.” When they got home, Tess remained quiet, put on her PJs, and
got in bed without saying good-night.

History Repeats Itself
Our survival strategies tend to arise within our family context. The early
classroom of the family shows us so much about how to handle the
inevitable differences that emerge when lives entwine in love. Stimulus.
Space. Response. Self-awareness grows when we ask ourselves questions
like:
What did the people who raised me show me about the space
between stimulus and response?
How did the adults in my life manage their feelings of upset,
irritation, and anger?
What sorts of low-road behaviors were most common in my house
growing up?
Some of us use self-protective survival strategies that mirror what we
saw growing up. For others, memories of a parent who was prone to fits of
rage, for example, create an urge to behave in exactly the opposite way, out
of fear of becoming that parent. The desire to break the legacy is noble;
however, turning 180 degrees is rarely the best option. In this case, 180
degrees from raging requires shutting down and disengaging from self and
other. The consequence of tamping down emotions is steep and likely
creates disconnection from self, loss of vitality, and emotional numbness.
While it is certainly understandable to never want to become what you
feared as a child, commit yourself to finding a shade of gray between rage
and suppression. The work we are doing here will support your process.
Embracing a brave and deep way of loving yourself and others requires
curiosity about what else is possible. Growing beyond fighting or fleeing
takes guts. Motivation to change sometimes can be found by recalling how
your parents’ use of survival strategies felt to you as a kid. Helping my
clients remember how lonely they felt when their mom disappeared into her
room in obvious but unspoken pain, or how frightened they felt when their
dad yelled, can provide powerful motivation to claim healthier ways to
handle big feelings. The key question is this: what would have been
different for you if that parent had learned to honor the space between
stimulus (whatever upset him or her) and response (yelling or hiding)?

Pressing Pause
When something happens and emotions come rushing in, you are at a fork
in the road with multiple possibilities ahead. The first step, and it’s a huge
step, is pressing pause. Pressing pause gives you the chance to remember
that something beyond fighting or fleeing exists. Pausing is an adaptive
time-out that allows you to claim some stillness and some time. When you
pause, you commit yourself to not talking, texting, calling, or otherwise
acting…yet. In your pause, you may choose to go into a separate space,
especially if you and your partner were in the same room when the incident
occurred. Here are some ideas to keep in mind:
Verbalize the need for a pause. Say something like, “I’m really
upset, and I’m taking a pause” or “I need to go calm down for a
little while. I can’t talk right now.” Saying this out loud instead of
just walking away is especially helpful if you tend toward a volumedown survival strategy like withdrawing and shutting down, because
pressing pause is not the same thing as withdrawing. It is step one
on a journey toward compassion for yourself and the other person.
Use “I” or “we” statements. Some partners make an agreement
that either of them is authorized to call a time-out when they feel
flooded or upset. It is best to say, “I need a time out” or “I think we
need a time out,” instead of saying, “You need a time out,” which
takes your attention away from your own experience and invites the
other person’s defensiveness.
Consider creating a safety word. Because it can be hard to choose
careful and thoughtful language when upset, some couples come up
with a safety word that communicates to the other person that some
time and a space to calm down is needed. It doesn’t matter what the
word is (cantaloupe… armadillo). What matters is that you and your
partner know that the safe word indicates a break in the action. It is
a way of saying, “I’m a mess. This is a mess. I need space.”
Practice mindful breathing. As you will practice in the exercises at
the end of this lesson, when you pause, it can be helpful to take
some deep breaths. Place one hand on your heart and one hand on

your belly. Bring your attention to your breathing, noticing your
inhale and your exhale. This mindfulness strategy brings your
attention to the present moment and changes your physiology. Think
of the deep breaths as opening a door to your different, consciously
chosen, self-aware, and brave response.
If we all committed ourselves to pressing pause, the world would be a
very different place. Reality shows would have to reinvent themselves.
Viewers watch The Real Housewives of because volume-up self-protective
survival strategies, while awful for intimate relationships, apparently make
for great TV. Much of the suffering that happens in relationships, intimate
and otherwise, changes and dissolves when we press pause.
Committing yourself to just this first step is huge, and when you are
able to do it, I invite you to celebrate! Growing your ability to notice you
are upset and pause before responding is hard and brave work for a number
of reasons. First, the stuff that sets you off is likely related to your core
issues, meaning it’s old and deep. Second, taking a pause requires you to
win a battle over your biology. Your emotional brain is much “older” in an
evolutionary sense than your wise, flexible prefrontal cortex, so taking a
pause requires a newer and more fragile part of your brain to conquer an
ancient warrior. Third, woven into the very nature of feeling upset and
reactive is a sort of entitlement and arrogance. When upset, we tend to
believe that the situation demands an immediate response and that our first
response is, in fact, the best response. Lastly, we live in a world that moves
at lightning speed, so it makes sense that we tend to think that a fast
response is a better response. Saying that someone can really “think on her
feet” is a compliment. I think that we should instead value the ability to say,
“This is important, so I want to take some time before I respond.”
Volume-up survival strategies can seem so compelling because the
situation before us feels out of control, and therefore we feel out of control.
We are uncomfortable, so we want to act on our environment—to do
something that makes us feel “in control” again. But taking a pause opens
up the possibility that, rather than being a victim of our reactivity and our
environment, we can claim some real power—power over ourselves, power
to choose how we want to respond (Fishbane 2013). Taking a pause is the
true way to gain control. In the next lesson, we will talk about how you can
choose to respond once you have gained the power of choice.

Standing at a Crossroads: Reactive Breakups
Before ending this lesson, I want to include a thought about reactive
breakups. Breaking up with your partner in the midst of a painful, awful
conflict is the outer edge of a volume-down self-protective survival
strategy. If the pain feels too great, ending the relationship may seem like
the only way to stop the hurt. However, discernment is warranted. Reactive
breakups that happen in the throes of a fight-or-flight response carry hidden
risks. Even as you are attempting to stop the pain, you may create additional
pain. Calling it quits as a means of self-protection may make you more
likely to reengage in the relationship once the strong feelings have passed,
allowing the same old conflict pattern to continue: break up, make up, fight,
retreat, repair, reinjure. This dance is exhausting for everyone involved. The
dance perpetuates disconnection from oneself, and the dance erodes trust
between partners.
Reactive flight-based breakups also tend to kick up so much dust that
the deeper self-learning is lost. As the saying goes, “You bring yourself
with you.” This means there is risk of repeating this same pattern in your
next relationship. If and when old drama replays in a new relationship, you
certainly deserve compassion, and the opportunity for learning and healing
is always there. However, because self-awareness changes old patterns, it is
empowering to say, “I will no longer hide from myself. Love is a
classroom, and I want to access the learning housed within my pain.” It
takes great courage to dive into the pain that hides beneath flight, to hold
awareness for the old stories that fuel the urge to run away. Those old
stories may be quite tender: I am worthless… I am incapable of loving
someone… I am damaged beyond repair. These old stories, like desperately
sad children, need compassion and tender loving care.
The decision to stay or leave is separate and apart from the quiet
internal work of honoring the pain beneath your self-protective behavior.
Although running may provide relief in the moment, if you can stay present
with the pain beneath the urge to flee, you are more likely to ultimately
make a choice that is empowered instead of reactive. To grow like this, you
must trust that no matter what the other person is doing, saying, or being, it
is always of great value to look at the aspect of yourself that is being
emotionally stirred. Study your reactivity. What is the old story about
yourself that needs to be brought into the light of love? From this quiet

place of deep friendship with yourself, the decision to stay or go changes.
Rather than a need to hang on, to escape, or to punish the other person, you
can make an empowered choice based on the value of this relationship in
your life.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
When upset, we are prone to sprinting past the precious and precarious space
between stimulus and response, yet freedom blossoms when we take ourselves
into our own power.

Volume Up and Volume Down
Look back at the lists of survival
strategies (in the section “In Battle”).
Write down the specific ones you tend
to use when you are upset.
(Alternatively, download the list from
http://www.newharbinger.com/35814
and circle the responses you commonly
have.) When you become reactive to
someone else’s words or behaviors (the
stimulus), are you prone to fighting or
fleeing (response)?
Take note of how you feel as you work
on naming your patterns. If you feel
defensive or judgmental, try to shift into
a place of compassionate curiosity,
knowing that, as you do, you are sowing
the seeds of transformation.
The Apple and the Tree

Now refer to the same list of behaviors
and, with different colored pens, write
down or circle the survival strategies
used by the adults in your family of
origin. Reflect on the overlaps and the
differences. How are your fight-or-flight
behaviors similar to or different from
the ones you saw the grown-ups in your
home use when you were growing up?
To what extent did your parents’ conflict
style create the roots of your selfprotective survival strategies?
Pressing Pause
Commit to the practice of pressing
pause when you feel yourself starting to
shift from calm and open to fight-orflight mode. Try the ideas below and see
what works best for you. (The “Guide
for Moving from Reactivity to
Intimacy” at
http://www.newharbinger.com/35814
has a list you can keep handy when you
need to strategize a helpful response).

• Belly breathing: Put your hand on your
belly, just below your ribs. As you inhale
through your nose, push your belly out
against your hand. Exhale slowly through
your mouth. Repeat three to ten times and
notice what changes within you.

• Count to ten: Before you say or do
anything, slowly count to ten. Notice
what changes within you.
• Mindful break: Before you say or do
anything, take a mindful break. Bring
your attention to the present moment
without judgment. Simply describe what
each of your five senses is experiencing
right here, right now. What are you
seeing, hearing, smelling, touching, and
tasting?
• Sensory input: Some people find it
helpful to enhance a mindful break by
seeking intense sensory input. See
whether adding sensory input enhances
your ability to sit in the pause using one
of these examples:
Suck on a mint.
Rub your hand against something
comforting like fleece.
Smell something good like a
candle or soap.
Listen to music.
• Love altar: Create a love altar by
arranging special photos and mementos in
a sacred place in your home. This does
not have to be elaborate! Supercharge any
of the above “Pressing Pause” practices
by doing them while sitting at your altar.
A love altar can help you stay connected
to why these emotion-regulation practices
are so important.

Lesson 14

Dig a Little Deeper
As lovers, we poise together delicately on a tightrope… To stay on the
rope, we must shift with each other’s moves, respond to each other’s
emotions.
—Sue Johnson

In the face of inevitable conflict, we are at risk of giving in to a reactive
desire to fight or flee, yet our bravest moves are those that shift us from
reactivity to intimacy. But how? The previous lesson ended with an
invitation to practice inhabiting the pause, the precious and precarious space
between stimulus and response, where Viktor Frankl finds our human
freedom. Within that pause are an array of possibilities that go far beyond
the black-and-white nature of the fight-or-flight response. When you take
the risk to dig a little deeper, what you access is your vulnerability—your
most authentic expression of self—thereby creating the potential to deepen
the connection with yourself and with your intimate partner.

Emotional Reactivity
Spoiler alert: no matter how hard we try, we will never fix or cure our
emotional reactivity. That’s not even a healthy aspiration, as our emotions,
even the messy ones, make us who we are. Our emotional life is a critical
part of being human. Experiences of sadness, fear, anger, happiness, and
surprise color the stories of our lives, and though we may prefer to
experience only the so-called “positive” emotions, the so-called “negative”
emotions are just as real and valuable. Emotions are the natural response to
life, and we are most able to connect with others when we can stay present
with our feelings.
Knowing we will never stop having emotional reactions to the world
around us, or to our partner specifically, we can set two goals for ourselves:

To reduce the amount of time it takes to notice that we have exited
the high road and are barreling ahead on the low road (to catch
ourselves in fight-or-flight mode)
To be courageous enough to move away from our self-protective
fight-or-flight survival strategies and to speak instead from a
vulnerable place that is braver and deeper

From Reactivity to Vulnerability
The imperfect journey of shifting from reactivity to vulnerability involves a
process:
Your partner has done something (stimulus).
You feel something (response).
You press pause so that you can study your reactivity.
You use the Name-Connect-Choose process to help you move from
intimacy-preventing reactivity to intimacy-inviting vulnerability.
The first three parts were covered in the previous lesson. This lesson
will teach you how to do the last part.
Name: Tell Yourself the Story
When we get upset, everything inside starts to feel very messy very
quickly. Fragmented thoughts swirl, emotions swell, and our bodies become
distraught. By pressing pause, you lessen the impact of these reactions and
can more easily move on to this next step.
Start by simply describing to yourself what has happened. You can tell
the story inside your head or you can write it down. Make sure you back up
and start with the events that led up to your upset feelings so that you can
look at the context of the upsetting moment itself. Start with the big picture
and then narrow it down to the specifics of what happened. Naming the
sequence of events in this way does two things at once:

It provides you with some internal organization, helping you feel
less confused and calmer.
It can help you see something you didn’t see before, shifting you
from a linear conflict story to a systemic conflict story.
Remember Tess, who got really upset when she saw her boyfriend,
Devon, talking with the beautiful stranger? Let’s imagine what might
happen if, instead of launching into fight-or-flight mode, she had been able
to pause and then use the Name-Connect-Choose process to shift herself
from reactivity to vulnerability. Here’s how that might have looked:
Devon finds Tess outside the party, and he can tell that she’s upset. He
asks what’s wrong, and she says, “I’ll tell you at some point, but I need
some time to calm down and figure some stuff out first.” As they walk
home, she does some “press pause” work. She takes deep breaths of the
crisp night air. She feels her feet on the earth. She listens attentively,
silently naming the various sounds around her, trusting that doing these
sensory, present-moment acts will create shifts in her. Her feelings are huge
right now, her thoughts are all over the place, and her body is on edge.
Inside her head, she is talking to herself the way a parent might talk to an
upset child, telling herself that these feelings make sense and that this
painful moment won’t last forever. Part of her desperately wants to give in
to her emotional reactivity and make it all about Devon, but another part of
her knows that love is a classroom. This wise part of her trusts that this
moment contains hidden gems, and that her relationship with herself and
with Devon will benefit from her journey within.
She begins to tell herself the story of what happened that evening,
hoping that naming her experience will help her start to feel at least a little
curious. She reflects on the beginning of the party. She and Devon were
talking among their friends. As Tess was telling a story about her boss, she
glanced over at Devon and noticed that he was checking his phone. She
recalls that she felt annoyed but said nothing to him about it. Later, Tess
went to the bathroom. On her way out, she caught a glimpse of herself in
the mirror and thought, “Ugh, why did I wear this dress?! I look so
frumpy!” Shortly after that, she saw Devon talking with the mystery
woman. Tess notes that she had felt disappointed and embarrassed seeing
Devon checking his phone. She also notes that the negative assessment she

made of herself in the bathroom further shifted her mood, making her feel
less bubbly, less chatty, and vaguely sad. She felt upset about her
appearance, but also upset that she was being so hard on herself about her
appearance. Seeing Devon talking to that woman now seems like maybe it
was the last straw.
In telling herself the story of the evening, Tess’s awareness expands as
she notes two new “data points.” Her initial, emotionally flooded story was,
“Devon is a jerk. I knew eventually he would do this to me. I was a fool for
trusting him.” Now that she has paused and told herself a more detailed and
contextual story of the evening, she wonders, “To what degree is my anger
at Devon shaped by the fact that I felt hurt that he was distracted during my
work story and by the fact that I was being mean to myself? If I had seen
myself in the mirror and said, ‘Damn, girl, looking good,’ how would I
have reacted to Devon’s behavior? Perhaps I would have just walked over
and joined the conversation.”
She has no answers, but in pausing and telling herself the story of the
evening, she has shifted from a thin and linear black-and-white conflict
story (“Devon is a jerk”) to a thick and systemic dialectical (both/and)
conflict story: “Devon and I were having fun. And I felt a little hurt and
confused by his behavior. And I felt quite self-critical. And I felt really upset
that he was talking to that woman.”
Connect: Find the Feeling Behind the Feeling
Telling yourself the story of what has happened can help you begin to
identify and connect with your feelings. And there is usually more than one
feeling swirling inside. Dr. Sue Johnson makes a helpful distinction
between secondary and primary feelings. Secondary feelings accompany
and fuel the self-protective survival strategies that are running the show
when we are in fight-or-flight mode: anger, outrage, and irritation.
Secondary feelings are like a coat of armor, making us feel that we are safe
and nobody can hurt us.
Anger is the most common secondary emotion and warrants special
attention. As with any of our emotions, there’s nothing bad or wrong with
anger. Anger just is. Anger can alert us that a boundary has been violated.
Anger can be a call to action. Anger can wake us from an emotional

slumber. But anger requires our “A game.” Anger is rarely helpful when
expressed in its raw form. It insists that we work bravely with it,
transforming coal to diamond. We must honor anger as a valuable signal
emerging from within, while at the same time recognizing that in order to
use our anger for good, we must engage it rather than allowing it to run the
show. Engaging our anger means working skillfully and respectfully with it,
as you will learn to do in this lesson. When we do this, we validate
ourselves and respect the other person, accelerating emotional growth and
promoting healing.
You see, there is usually something else going on, something hiding out
beneath and behind the anger. That something is a primary feeling—the
feeling behind the feeling. Primary feelings are more vulnerable, more
tender, and softer than secondary feelings. They include sadness, shame,
loneliness, fear, and inadequacy. There is a huge payoff, internally and
relationally, for honoring our primary feelings.
But it’s hard. Many of us would do just about anything to avoid primary
feelings. Men especially are taught to avoid them like the plague—don’t
feel them and, if you do, certainly don’t share them. Men and women alike
have been conditioned to believe that primary feelings indicate weakness
and that exposing them would make their partners turn and run. In couples
therapy, when I am able to help a partner shift from expressing secondary
feelings to expressing primary feelings—from anger to sadness, for
example—the payoff is amazing! Invariably, the other person softens, leans
in, and affirms that there is great strength in vulnerability (Brown 2015).
When you are in the throes of a secondary feeling, such as anger,
connect with the feeling behind the feeling. Remember that behind an angry
person is a hurt person. Take the risk to compassionately connect with your
hurt (your primary feelings) without judgments about whether you “should”
feel hurt. As you begin to connect with a primary feeling, simply welcome
it, stay present to it, and feel it. Feelings simply are, so questioning their
validity is a road to nowhere.
Back to Tess. The pause she took calmed her body down. Naming the
story of the evening helped her feel less confused and more open to
possibilities beyond her reactive, linear story that “Devon is a jerk.” She
still feels angry, but now she is also connecting with primary feelings
behind her anger. The image that comes into her mind is that the secondary

feeling—the anger—is a jar of navy blue paint. The primary feelings that
are rising to her awareness—fear and shame—are white paint, being mixed
into the navy blue. The blue color is still there, but it is changing. She holds
awareness of her fear. Her fear is saying that if Devon is talking to another
woman, he will leave her for someone else. She holds awareness of her
shame. Her shame is saying that Devon’s apparent interest in another
woman means that she is not enough for him. She starts to cry. She is
bravely letting herself feel these primary emotions. Part of her is saying,
“This is hard! It’s much easier just to focus on how wrong he is.” And
another part of her feels proud that she is handling herself this way.
Choose: Give Voice to Primary Feelings
After naming and connecting, it is time to choose your response.
Choose a response that is guided by a question Neal Donald Walsh
encourages us to ask: “What would love do?” From this hard-earned place
of choice, as you hold awareness of your story and your pain, you have the
opportunity to do what love would do. Love speaks truth in the service of
intimate connection. Love speaks the language of primary feelings. Love
speaks vulnerably: “I am hurting so badly… I am desperate to be seen and
heard… I am questioning my worth… I feel unsteady and unsure… I could
use some comfort.” When you choose to give voice to your primary
feelings, you increase your chances of authentic engagement and care from
your partner—even if he or she is also hurting. Rage and defensiveness
cannot persist in the face of authentic vulnerability. Your ability to choose
love transforms the entire relationship dance.
Sometimes when you give voice to your primary feelings, that’s the end
of it. Apologies are offered and forgiveness is granted. We let go and move
on. Other times, vulnerably giving voice to primary feelings is an invitation
to dive even deeper. When you shift into voicing primary feelings, curiosity
flourishes, and now, as students in the same classroom, you can look
together at whether and how the past is shaping the present moment. Are
old stories in the room, adding confusion to the present moment, as they are
prone to do? Safer in the presence of your partner, you can explore:
What does this feeling I have right now remind me of from my past?

When was the first time I felt this way?
Who from my past related to me the way my partner is relating to
me now?
Sharing at this level creates deeper knowledge of yourself and your
partner. It grows trust by allowing your partner to see you in your fullness
and to love you anyway. This kind of sharing also offers healing to the
wounded kid who lives inside of you and who still carries the old story. In
the light of love, the wounded child’s burden is lessened.
Now let’s return to Tess and Devon: Tess wipes her eyes and takes a
deep breath. She’s not quite able to look at Devon as she speaks, but she
begins to open up to him about her tender feelings. Devon listens. His quiet
presence invites her to dig even deeper. She talks with Devon about her
parents’ divorce. As an adult, Tess can hold a complex story about the
multiple factors that led to the divorce, and, as an adult, Tess knows that the
divorce was not her fault. But the wounded child within Tess recalls her
dad’s heartbreak when he found out about her mom’s affair, and her old
story is that “Mom cheated on us.” The wounded girl is terrified that she
will never be “enough” to make someone stay. As Tess gives voice to that
old shame-loaded story, Devon neither diminishes her nor recoils from her.
He holds a steady, compassionate place for the story of her wounded child.
Being in love with Devon puts Tess face-to-face with her old stories.
There’s no way around it. Ultimately, she cannot control whether Devon
stays or goes. Nor can he control whether she stays or goes. But by working
with her emotional reactivity—consequently her vulnerability—she bravely
transforms conflict into connection, allowing her and Devon to move
through this moment in a way that doesn’t do damage to their relationship
and instead brings them closer together.
Because communication is the oxygen of an intimate relationship, care
and attention to all that is within and between us ensures healthy air quality.
We become reactive precisely because the relationship matters so much.
Love demands that we become students of our reactivity, seeking rich
understanding not only of the nature of our emotional reactivity and the
survival strategies we employ in the face of strong emotions, but also of the
wisdom and beauty that swirl behind our pained facades.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Digging a little deeper means telling the story of your upset (name), exploring
the feelings behind the feelings (connect), and giving voice to your vulnerability
(choose) in order to authentically connect with yourself and your partner.

From Reactivity to Intimacy
Our Name-Connect-Choose process will
help you dig a little deeper in order to
shift from reactivity to intimacy. The
next time you find yourself getting upset
with someone you are close to, pause
and then take yourself through these
steps. The online “Guide for Moving
from Reactivity to Intimacy”
summarizes these steps
(http://www.newharbinger.com/35814).
Name: Tell yourself the story. Start by telling
yourself the story of what happened. Make sure you
“rewind” inside your head to the events that
preceded your upset feeling. Think about all the
details surrounding what occurred, not just the
moment you became upset.
Connect: Find the feeling behind the feeling.
Allow yourself to be present with your emotions.
What do you notice? Where in your body do you feel
it? What does it feel like? If you can only access
secondary feelings like anger, keep breathing with
the anger, thinking about what message it carries.
What does the anger need you to know? What are its
demands? Stay curious about what else might be
there, hiding quietly behind the anger. As you
become aware of other feelings, particularly primary

feelings, welcome them and listen to them without
judgment. Your curiosity holds healing power.
Choose: Give voice to primary feelings. It’s time!
Step boldly into voice, trusting that there is great
strength in your vulnerability. Talk with your loved
one about your primary feelings. I hope that your
brave choice is met with a compassionate and caring
response. If you are met with anything less than
compassion and care, remember that the other
person’s response belongs to him or her and says
nothing about you. It does, however, give you data—
about the amount of safety within the relationship
and about the nature of the other person’s
woundedness.

Lesson 15

Build the Cushion
While healthy adults are able to self-regulate and self-soothe when
upset, we don’t outgrow our need for soothing and regulation from others,
especially intimate others.
—Mona DeKoven Fishbane

In an intimate relationship, there is an overriding ultimate equation for
success: Do less of the bad and do more of the good. Do less of the stuff
that creates disengagement, distance, and resentment and do more of the
stuff that creates closeness, trust, and empathy. The choices we make when
facing difficult moments with those we love powerfully shape the course of
events. In this lesson we will explore practices that help us do more of the
good in our intimate relationship, because actively working to build the
cushion of positive connection reduces the chances of slipping into hostility
and suffering. We will talk about two practices, both of which begin within
and have impact between: making mindful language choices and embracing
love languages.

Seven Traps and Seven Reaches
Although the escalated language of fight and the icy silence of flight are
obvious, there are some subtle language choices that we make in our
intimate relationships that aren’t as clear-cut but that still send us down a
slippery slope. Let’s look at seven common but problematic relational
language choices, or intimacy-preventing traps. For each of these seven
intimacy-preventing traps, I am offering an alternative—an intimacyinviting reach. These are language choices that support a brave shift toward
vulnerability and authenticity, allowing us to reach across the space
between self and other with an invitation to connect. It is amazing how
subtle or small shifts in language affect how you perceive and experience

the moment with your partner and consequently profoundly shape how your
partner experiences you. Committing yourself to speaking from the
intimacy-inviting reaches goes a long way toward building a cushion of
relational positivity that’s good for everyone.
1. Trap: “You Need To…”
On the low road, things—you, your partner, the world—feel very out of
control, and you may begin talking to your partner like this: “You need to
________________ [apologize to me…take responsibility for your
actions…call your brother…stop spending so much money].” This is the
language of control, and it is guided by the fear-based belief that if the other
person changes, you’ll feel better. Even if this happens to be accurate, this
language is intimacy-preventing because we tend to mount resistance in the
face of another’s effort to control us, and a battle of wills ensues. Does this
sound familiar? “You need to send that e-mail.” “No I don’t!” “Yes you
do!”
REACH: “I FEEL SO…”

When you feel out of control like this, rather than saying, “You need
to… ,” see what happens when you begin to see the urge to control your
external world and the people in it as a cue to you that something must feel
awful inside of you. Instead of trying to control others, tune in to that awful
feeling and give it voice. For example, instead of saying, “You need to get a
job,” try saying “I feel so scared about money. You have been out of work
for six months, and the bills are piling up. I am terrified, and I feel as if my
concerns are being ignored.” This is the brave language of vulnerability.
Letting your partner into your world invites empathy, collaboration, and
closeness.
2. Trap: “You Make Me Feel…”
When we are upset in the face of another’s actions or inactions, it is so
easy to move into blame, saying, “You make me feel so ________________
[awful, ugly, worthless, stupid, angry, exhausted].” This kind of statement is
intimacy-preventing for three reasons. First, this language implies intent
that may or may not be there. The impact of your partner’s actions may be

that you feel awful without your partner intending for you to feel that way.
Be careful not to travel too deeply into another’s head! Second, this
language is the essence of abandoning yourself. In this language, you have
given away your power and put yourself at the mercy of another. When you
abandon yourself, there can be no intimacy with another person. Third, this
language reflects that you have forgotten about that precious and precarious
space between stimulus and response. Your partner acted in a certain way
(stimulus). There is a space. You feel awful (response). What else, besides a
thin story of intentional hurt and blame, is possible in that powerful space
between stimulus and response?
REACH: XYZ STATEMENT

When upset, I love the suggestion from Drs. Howard Markman and
Scott Stanley (2010) to use an XYZ statement. An XYZ statement goes like
this: “When you do X, in situation Y, I feel Z.” For example, “When you
roll your eyes as I’m talking about the fight I had with my brother, I feel
angry, invalidated, and unimportant.” The difference is subtle yet powerful.
In an XYZ statement, you are doing three intimacy-inviting things at once:
holding the other person accountable for his or her actions (but not for your
feelings), giving context, and taking responsibility for your feelings. This
brave reach changes everything—within you and between you and your
partner.
3. Trap: The Disembodied “You”
During a therapy session, Mary explained a struggle she was having in
her intimate relationship. She said, “You just don’t know whether you
should stay or go. You feel like he’s a good guy but you feel scared.” I
invited her to shift her language. “Mary, what you’re saying is so important,
but I’d really like you to say it again, this time using ‘I’ instead of ‘you.’”
Mary looked puzzled but agreed: “I just don’t know whether I should stay
or go. I feel like he’s a good guy but I feel scared.” As Mary shifted her
language, her face softened and tears filled her eyes. When I train new
therapists, I urge them to listen vigilantly for this subtle yet meaningful
language choice, and I urge them to invite their clients to shift from the
disembodied “you.” It is much more than just a minor detail or semantic
concern. It’s about how you stand vis-à-vis your story.

REACH: THE EMBODIED “I”

The alternative to the disembodied “you” is to commit to saying “I”
when talking about yourself. When you do this, you engage your story as
deeply and uniquely yours and insist on connection to yourself, knowing it
is the precursor for connection with another person. When you catch
yourself slipping into the disembodied “you,” ask yourself what is going on.
Is the disembodied “you” an attempt to avoid your pain? What if you
invited your pain in, held it as you would a distressed child, and trusted
your resilience?
4. Trap: “Why Did You…?”
Asking “Why did you… ?” or “Why didn’t you… ?” invites
defensiveness.
REACH: “WHAT KEPT YOU FROM…?”

Asking “What kept you from… ?” invites collaboration. If you ask your
partner, “Why did you lie to me?” you invite him or her to explain the cause
of his or her behavior to you. In all likelihood, your partner’s voice will
sound and feel defensive to you, the story he or she tells isn’t going to feel
satisfying to you, and the pain of the lie will remain. Instead, try asking
your partner a constraint question (Pinsof et al. 2015): “What kept you from
being truthful with me?”
A constraint question orients you and your partner toward the behavior
you desire: truth. It invites your partner to talk with you about what gets in
the way of truth, putting you both on a path toward a systemic conflict
story. Your partner’s answer may be: “What kept me from telling you the
truth is my fear of your reaction.” The story has just gone from linear (“you
lied to me”) to systemic (“something is keeping you from being honest with
me”).
What is your stuff? What is my stuff? What is our stuff? That becomes
the work! The possibility for side-by-side collaboration emerges. Your pain
in the wake of the lie (or other behavior) remains valuable, because it
invites you both to mine together for the complex truths that exist within
and between you.

5. Trap: Should or Shouldn’t
Musterbation is the desire for a set of rules for how things should be.
Dr. Albert Ellis coined this term to capture our tendency to argue with our
present reality as it exists right here, right now. Usually musterbation
appears in our relationships in the form of a “should.” For example, “You
should plan a night out for us. That’s what people do for each other.”
Similar to “you need to,” the language of “should” reflects a quest for
control and a difficulty remembering that all we can ever control is
ourselves. Slipping into the language of should and shouldn’t creates a
barrier between you and your partner. It also creates a barrier between you
and happiness!
REACH: GIVE VOICE TO WHAT YOU WANT

Use your “should” language as a signal to yourself that an unmet need
or longing within you is desperate for attention. Give voice to that instead.
Far more vulnerable and therefore intimacy-inviting, asking for what you
need soothes you and changes the course of the conflict. “I am longing
for…” “I am desperate for…” “I would love for you to…” “It would mean
a lot to me if you would…” For example, instead of using a “should”
statement, see what happens if you say: “I would love for you to plan a
night out for us. I am really longing for some time together, and it would
mean a lot to me if you took the lead on it.”
6. Trap: Always or Never
In the face of conflict, it is easy to become polarized, reflected by use of
words like “always” and “never.” Insisting that your partner always or
never does something or says something probably isn’t accurate. And even
if it happens to be accurate, it is another invitation for defensiveness. In the
face of your “always” or “never,” your partner will probably do one of two
things:
Try to think of an exception to your declaration
Try to recall something that you always or never do

The linear back-and-forth blame game will continue, and you’ll end up
feeling farther apart.
REACH: OFTEN, LATELY, RARELY, IT SEEMS

Recognize that “always” and “never” language is usually an effort to
turn the volume up in order to be heard. You need to be heard, and you
deserve to be heard. But if you find yourself slipping into “always” or
“never” language, try softening to “often,” “lately,” or “rarely.” Another
option is to remember that perspective shapes perception; frame your
observation as coming from your point of view by saying, “It seems to me
that…” or “It feels to me like…” This intimacy-inviting shift lets your
partner know that even as you’re feeling hurt and confused, part of you
knows there’s more to the story than what you can see right now.
7. Trap: How Can I Get My Partner to…?
This final intimacy-preventing trap is one that is likely said inside your
head or over a glass of wine with a friend. And it’s sneaky. Saying “How
can I get him to…” is problematic. Voicing your concern in this way
indicates that you believe that you do not have authentic power and that you
must resort to indirect means of getting what you want. If this is your
perception, use it as a warning sign that something is amiss within your
relationship because in a healthy intimate relationship, wants and needs are
legitimized, validated, and given space. Whether, how, and when the want
or need gets met is a separate matter, but in a healthy intimate relationship
each partner is able to verbalize his or her longings.
REACH: LABEL WHAT YOU REALLY WANT OR NEED

The antidote to this trap is the Name-Connect-Choose process. Name
your longing or your unmet need, connect with the vulnerable feelings
attached to the unmet need, and choose to directly ask for what you want.
Here’s an example.
Name: I long for more touch in our relationship.
Connect: I feel sad and unimportant.

Choose: I am going to bring this up as a problem.
It may also be helpful to let your partner know that you are stuck in this
intimacy-preventing trap. This way the two of you can wonder together
about what is getting in the way of asking directly for what you need.
Changing your stance changes the dance. Standing in your vulnerability
invites others to do the same (Brown 2015). Your journey toward wholeness
invites others to embark on theirs. But it does not guarantee that they will.
Be aware of your significant other’s response to your vulnerable
disclosures. Vulnerability deserves to be met honorably and without
shaming, and vulnerable disclosures ought not to be used against you. The
space between you holds the potential to be a crucible for witnessing, for
truth, for accountability, and therefore for transformation. In my therapy
office, I encourage clients to view vulnerable disclosures as sacred gifts that
warrant the utmost respect in return.

Listening with the Third Ear
The power of these traps and reaches begins with you, but that’s not where
it ends. As Vietnamese Zen monk Thich Nhat Hanh offers, “When someone
you love suffers, you’re motivated to do something to help. But if you don’t
know how to handle the suffering in yourself, how can you help the other
person to handle his suffering? We first have to handle the suffering in
ourselves. Whenever a painful feeling or emotion arises, we should be able
to be present with it—not fight it, but recognize it” (2011, 77).
So what happens when it’s your partner who is using intimacypreventing language? What can you do, especially when he or she is upset
with you? When this happens, it is truly an invitation for your prefrontal
cortex to show you what it’s made of! Can this exquisite part of your brain
keep you driving along the high road in the face of somebody else’s upset?
It is not easy to stay brave and open, especially because your partner’s
opinion of you is likely quite central to how you experience yourself. But it
is possible.
When someone you care about is upset with you, you can ask yourself
the question, “What would love do?” Love tries mightily to stay regulated
even in the face of another’s disappointment and upset. Love listens with

the third ear—a term coined by psychoanalyst Theodor Reik. Listening
with the third ear means listening in order to understand rather than
listening in order to respond. Our default setting tends to be the latter:
formulating our response while the other person talks. Yet what the other
person seeks is not our response. It is our understanding—love manifest in
the form of compassion. What an offering it is to suspend our ego’s desire
to explain, defend, and clarify in order to make space for the experience of
another person!
When you listen with your third ear, you are truly a conduit of love. In
addition, when you listen with your third ear in response to the other
person’s intimacy-preventing trap, you actually receive two gifts. First, you
get the experience of witnessing firsthand how the fight-or-flight urge
softens and transforms when met with steady love. Second, you get the
experience of witnessing yourself behave in a brave and loving way.
Everybody wins.

Love Languages
Another cushion-building practice is respecting the power of love
languages. Relationship counselor and best-selling author Dr. Gary
Chapman (2015) uses the term “love languages” to capture the idea that
there is more than one way to give and receive love. Love speaks more than
one language, and each of us has a preferred “tongue” for giving and
receiving love. Love languages are both unique to the individual and
impactful on the couple. I especially like how Dr. Chapman presents the
five languages as simply different from each other. There is no hierarchy.
Here are the five languages of love, according to Dr. Chapman:
Words of affirmation (“You are so talented.”)
Acts of service (doing the dishes even though it’s not your turn)
Giving/receiving gifts (surprising her with tickets to see Jay Z in
concert)
Quality time (dinner and a movie)

Physical touch (hugging, back scratching, sex)
Disconnection happens when we, knowingly or unknowingly, value our
own preferred love language above all others, judging our partners for not
loving the way we do. Intimacy flows when we consciously give love in the
language our partner can best receive it. And like everything else, our love
language is often learned in the classroom of our childhood home.
I wish Todd and I had understood years ago how individual love
languages impact intimate relationships, because it would have saved us a
lot of drama. Here’s an example. My mom’s primary love language is
giving and receiving gifts. As a kid, when my birthday approached, I would
make a wish list. The day itself was a grand event, including meals of my
choice—shrimp salad on cheesebread at Jacobson’s for lunch, and spaghetti
and meat sauce for dinner—and an elaborate “birthday table” of gifts.
Todd grew up in a family whose primary love language was quality
time. Birthdays were a chance to gather together and do something fun, but
gift giving was minimal and secondary. The differences in our primary love
languages created plenty of misunderstandings in our early years. Imagine
my disappointment when he gave me a balloon and a bag of gummy bears
for my birthday. Imagine his confusion and discomfort when I would spend
lots of time wrapping gifts for him. I wish we had known that love
languages just are. Accepting and embracing the amazing is-ness (they are
what they are) of love languages makes life so much easier.
Today, instead of buying gifts, I plan an adventure for Todd’s birthday
because I know, accept, and embrace that receiving gifts not only doesn’t
feel good but actually feels stressful to him. And we have agreed that if I
would like a gift from him, I identify it, ask for it, and feel grateful if and
when I receive it.
Respecting the power of love languages is as simple as it is profound.
Identify your love language and humbly acknowledge that yours is not the
best and only. Identify your partner’s love language and be willing to
“speak” it. Invite him or her to speak yours, but embrace that when love
speaks to you in a language that is not your native one, it’s still love. See
how it feels when you welcome, rather than judge, love that speaks a little
differently.

As Dr. Mona Fishbane’s quote at the beginning of this lesson makes
clear, intimate relationships invite us into a dynamic interdependence in
which my choices and your choices commingle, like watercolors on canvas,
changing us before our eyes. When I remain in touch with myself, I am
responsible for my part of our dance, and the contributions I make can build
the cushion of positivity and connection between us. I can expect and
invite, but not demand, the same from you.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Build a cushion of relational positivity by committing to practices that embody
love—choosing intimacy-inviting reaches and embracing unique love languages.

Traps and Reaches
The seven Intimacy-Preventing Traps
identify which of these you are prone to
using. Try practicing the intimacyinviting reach that corresponds to your
intimacy-preventing trap. When you are
able to use an intimacy-inviting reach,
give yourself lots of praise. These
patterns are tough to change! How did
the intimacy-inviting reach shift your
emotions? How did your intimacyinviting reach shift the other person’s
experience?
Love Language
What is your primary love language?
You can take an online assessment in
order to find out at:
http://www.5lovelanguages.com. Is your

love language the same as or different
from the love languages spoken in your
house when you were growing up?
Reflect on your intimate relationships.
Have differences in love languages been
a source of tension? If so, how can you
use this newly gained knowledge to
handle these conflicts differently going
forward?
Putting It All Together
The previous few lessons have explored
some powerful ways of thinking about
and navigating conflict, so this table is
offered as a way of putting it all
together. Review the table and circle
what feels especially new and helpful to
you.

Low Road

High Road

Linear conflict story

Systemic conflict story

Reactive

Vulnerable

Fight or flee

Embrace the pause

Self-protective survival strategies

Speak from vulnerability

Secondary feelings: angry, enraged, furious, insulted,
agitated, irritable, disrespected

Primary feelings: sad, ashamed, lonely,
inadequate, disappointed

Low Road
Intimacy-preventing traps

High Road
Intimacy-inviting reaches

Part 4

Self-Expansion

Lesson 16

Practice a Loving “I’m Sorry”
Beyond our ideas of right-doing and wrong-doing, there is a field. I’ll
meet you there.
—Rumi

It has been seven weeks since Kevin’s foot surgery. Although he’s no
longer in a cast, he still isn’t able to walk or drive. His partner, Matt, has
picked up a lot of slack around the house. And with two full-time jobs and
two little kids, there is plenty of slack! One morning, after helping Kevin
into the tub, Matt grabs his shaving cream.
“Ugh!” Matt groans. “What is this crust all over my shaving cream?”
Kevin fires back loudly, “If you have such a huge issue with me using
your shaving cream, drive your butt to the store and buy another can!”
Matt puts his razor and shaving cream down on the counter and turns to
face Kevin. “Excuse me?”
Kevin takes a deep breath, and his face softens. “I’m sorry, Matt. It’s not
you. It’s this [pointing to his foot]. I am so sick of being immobilized. I feel
awful about how hard you’ve been working. I’m just so done feeling like
this!”
Matt comes over and kisses the top of his partner’s head. “I know. I’m
sick of it too. We will make it out alive. I promise!”
Kevin recounted this blowup at our therapy session, and I was aware
that the apology he offered Matt was no small victory! Yes, he was the one
who mishandled the shaving cream, and, yes, he was the one who blew up
at Matt. It was pretty obvious that a heartfelt “I’m sorry” was his best move,
but given Kevin’s history, this was real progress.
Kevin grew up in a family that, as he says, “didn’t do accountability.”
People neither gave nor took in feedback about the impact of their words
and actions on other people. Feelings got stuffed deep down inside, and

blowups like this one (if they happened at all) were just swept under the
rug. Kevin’s knee-jerk reaction to criticism—Matt’s comment about the
crust on the shaving cream—was to fight back, and that’s what he did
initially by telling Matt to go to the store. This is such an old and pervasive
pattern, in fact, that Matt’s nickname for Kevin is “Teflon” because nothing
sticks to him. As Matt says, “Somehow, Kevin is never at fault.”
What was different this time was that Kevin caught himself. He saw his
knee-jerk reaction for what it was—a low-road response to feeling
threatened. He course corrected and was able to quickly offer a heartfelt
apology. Kevin has worked to grow his relational self-awareness. He can
now see how his difficulty apologizing comes from his past and how it has
a negative impact on his relationship with Matt. In fact, he really deeply
knows how Matt feels when Kevin acts like Teflon because Kevin can recall
how confusing and lonely it felt when he was on the receiving end of his
parents’ lack of accountability. Even though it was hard to learn a new way,
Kevin wanted to break the cycle. He’s proud when he is able to practice a
new way.
Kevin’s old story is: If you are critical of me, I don’t trust that you can
also still love me and hold me in high esteem. The urge to explain, defend,
or argue back—the frantic effort to be valued—is still there inside of Kevin.
But moments like this, when Kevin apologizes and Matt is able to offer him
some comfort (a kiss on the head and assurance that they will get through
this), are so healing for Kevin. It’s neat to see how Kevin’s willingness to
apologize opened the door for him to receive what he most needed—to be
reminded that he is loved, imperfections and all.
Kevin’s apology was especially heartening given what he was going
through. His physical pain and limitations have left him feeling on edge
most of the time. He feels angry that he can’t drive or exercise, guilty that
his partner has to do so much, and ashamed that his partner has to help him
bathe and get dressed. Under stress, all of us are more likely to fall back on
less mature and less evolved ways of being in the world, so this chapter of
his life is giving Kevin plenty of opportunities to work on being
accountable for the impact of his behavior.
For his part, Matt’s ability to accept Kevin’s apology and move on
instead of holding a grudge rested on his awareness that this is an area of
great vulnerability for the man he loves. He has empathy for the dynamics

that Kevin grew up with, he sees how much progress Kevin had made, and
he trusts that Kevin will keep working on this core issue of his. Also, Matt
is humble, knowing that he, too, is a work in progress. Even with this
progress and deep commitment to their life together, Matt would never say
this work is easy, but he would say it feels worthwhile.

The Field Beyond
We hurt those we love. For all kinds of reasons. Looking at how we hurt
people we love is really hard work, kicking up incredibly uncomfortable
feelings as we confront discrepancies between who we believe ourselves to
be and who our actions suggest we are. The quote that opens this lesson, by
13th-century Sufi poet Rumi, offers a path that can help us tolerate this
painful dialectic—I both love you and sometimes hurt you. Any
confrontation of self about our hurtful behavior must take place in Rumi’s
field—the field out beyond right-doing and wrong-doing. The language of
bad and wrong is simply a dead-end road, as those labels are really limiting.
They cut off exploration, leading only to a call to action to “be different,”
which is too vague to be of service. Those labels also create shame, and
shame is a lousy motivator of change.
In fact, simplistic labels like “good” and “bad” end up blocking us from
being accountable for our behavior. My client, Val, is caught up in a
good/bad story that actually perpetuates her hurtful behavior. She says that
she does not want to look at her years-long pattern of cheating on her
husband because she fears that she will discover that she is “a terrible
person.” I get that! I wouldn’t want to look at my behavior either if my
story was razor thin, containing only the possibility of “I am a terrible
person” or “I am not a terrible person.” She is held captive by her limited
perspective, a perspective that prevents self-exploration because the stakes
are so high. Exploring why she’s engaging in behavior that at some level
she knows is hurtful to her husband and their marriage means risking being
stuck with a label that will create tons of shame. So her behavior persists.
She opts for an external focus instead: she cheats because he’s not
affectionate, she cheats because there is no passion in the marriage, she
cheats because she’s lonely.

If we are going to look at our hurtful behavior, we must do it in Rumi’s
field. Self-confrontation has to take place there. When it does—when we
are able to look at the choices we make that hurt the people we love—
unforeseen possibilities for self-understanding and self-compassion emerge.
And from that gentle field of space, change can happen. The dialectic here
is: I am both worthy of gentleness and responsible for my impact on others.
For Val, this would mean that she would begin to lovingly hold herself
accountable for her behavior, moving from passive victim to empowered
author of the life she wants. Therefore, rather than “bad” or “wrong,” I find
it helpful to talk about our hurtful behavior as forgetful or unskilled. This
language allows us to be gentle with ourselves yet keeps us accountable for
our actions.
“I Am Forgetful”
I believe that our true essence is love. I believe that for each and every
one of us, our truest path is the Golden Rule: “Do unto others as you would
have them do unto you.” Therefore, when our behavior is not aligned with
our true essence, we are behaving forgetfully. We are forgetting our true
nature.
When we do something hurtful, and our behavior is framed this way, the
questions are totally different. The questions are no longer “Am I a bad
person?” and “Why am I a bad person?” The questions become “What is
keeping me from remembering who I truly am?” and “What is keeping me
from treating my partner with love?” These latter questions are infinitely
more helpful. They invite change. The answers to these questions may lead
to any number of change-producing actions: confronting your partner about
ways you feel neglected or mistreated (causing you to do the same in
return), asking for what you need in the relationship, taking better care of
yourself, starting therapy, admitting to an addiction, and/or dealing with old
trauma. From this softened place of expanded awareness, we can also more
easily offer a heartfelt apology for our hurtful actions.
“I Am Unskilled”

Another shift that can make the “I’m sorry” flow more gently is viewing
your behavior as unskilled. Kevin has benefited from this language. He
hated looking at how much his difficulty with apologizing was hurting
Matt. It stirred up a ton of defensiveness in him. And behind that
defensiveness was a ton of shame—shame that led him to tell himself all
kinds of stories about what an awful partner he is, how he doesn’t deserve
Matt, how he has messed up their life, and so on. The pendulum swung all
the way from a blaming, no-apology stance to a shameful, I-am-worthless
stance. And in both of these stances, Kevin pushed Matt away. In working
on this issuue, Kevin found it helpful to frame his difficulty with apology as
an unskilled behavior.
In therapy we talked about how he inherited a triple threat of sorts.
First, he didn’t see the adults in his house growing up taking responsibility
for the impact of their actions. Second, in our Western culture, there is a
notion that apologizing is a sign of weakness. Third, growing up male he
internalized, in many direct and subtle ways, our society’s prescribed
masculine traits: “Keep the upper hand,” “Keep a stiff upper lip,” and
“Never back down.” These influences conspire to make apologizing
difficult. When viewed as a skill he needs to learn in order to improve his
relationship, practicing apologizing becomes prideful instead of shameful
for him.

Heartfelt Apologies 101
My husband, Todd, finds the topic of this lesson terribly amusing, as
offering a heartfelt apology is, shall we say, challenging for me. Like all of
us, I remain ever a work in progress. I have learned that when you roll your
eyes and put your hand on your hip as you say, “I’m sorry,” you negate the
apology entirely! I also have learned that the degree to which I am able to
greet my imperfections with gentleness is the degree to which I am able to
apologize with full eye contact, steady hips, and an open heart. Here are
some ideas to keep in mind:
You can offer a heartfelt apology if the impact is that you hurt
someone even if you did not intend to hurt them. Intent and impact
have little to do with each other.

You can apologize for something even if you think the other person
should not feel hurt and even if you would not feel hurt if the roles
were reversed.
Your apology does not mean that the other person is simply an
innocent victim. We often hurt others because we feel they hurt us
first, but it turns out this fact does not really matter all that much.
Your apology means that you are taking responsibility for your part.
At a different time, you may ask your partner to acknowledge and
apologize for how his or her actions hurt you.
When you apologize, you are acknowledging to yourself, to the
other person, and to the entire universe that you know you are not
perfect. The more deeply you embrace your imperfections, the
happier and healthier you will be. So apologizing helps your partner,
it helps the relationship, and it helps you. A heartfelt “I’m sorry”
packs quite a punch!
If you say, “I’m sorry, but…” (and then offer an explanation, an
excuse, or a counter-complaint about the other person), the “but”
negates the whole apology. The “but” is the verbal equivalent of the
hand on the hip or the eye roll. “I’m sorry” is a complete sentence.
Try to focus your apology on doing rather than being. In other
words, apologize for your actions (“I yelled” or “I forgot”) instead
of apologizing for who you are as a person (“I am rageful” or “I am
neglectful”).
Sometimes we say, “I’m sorry,” when we should be saying, “Thank
you.” For example, you call your partner in a panic because you
received a negative review from your supervisor. At the end of the
call, instead of saying, “I’m sorry I took up so much of your time,”
try saying, “Thank you for being here for me.”

Amends Action

Some heartfelt apologies need to be paired with an amends action. An
amends action is something you do in order to demonstrate your
understanding of the impact of your hurtful behavior. In fact, research
indicates that the acknowledgment of responsibility and offering to repair
are the most important ingredients in an apology (Lewicki, Polin, and Lount
2016). Amends actions move you from talking the talk to walking the walk.
I remember hearing an example of a man who gave up alcohol for a year as
an amends action for cheating on his partner. This was his attempt to
embody his apology, and, as the story goes, his amends action really helped
his partner. She felt he was taking their healing journey seriously, which
energized her to do her part—the difficult work of forgiving.
Another form of amends action happens when a couple works together
to figure out what needs to change between them. For example, when there
has been dishonesty about money, a couple may decide to grant each other
access to bank account information. Or when there has been infidelity, a
couple may create new and different boundaries like sharing passwords or
checking in more frequently when they are apart. Amends actions foster
trust when they are initiated by the one who is apologizing. Amends actions
can breed resentment when the one who is apologizing waits passively to
have “rules” given to him or her. The online “Guide to Heartfelt Apologies
and Forgiveness” (http://www.newharbinger.com/35814) provides a review
of this material.

I’m Sorry—Good-bye
Sometimes I work with couples who seek therapy in the eleventh hour, so to
speak, and sometimes the decision to end the relationship is made right
there in my office. Depending on how adversarial the breakup is, the
therapy may continue for a while, and we may do some wrap-up or
termination work. Couples have found it meaningful to create ending rituals
that can be devoted to mutual apologies: “I see how I hurt you. Here are the
ways that I was not able to be the person you needed me to be.”
This is a high-wire act for sure, and most of us can only touch that
expansive place for small windows of time before the complexity of our
emotional world swallows us up again. But even after that moment has
passed, you forever have the memory of witnessing yourself standing in

humble accountability. I think this is what people mean when they say they
want “closure.” They want the opportunity to hear the other person validate
their story of the relationship. Your chances of receiving that closure are
greatly increased if you are willing to give validation of the other person’s
story as well.

The Limits of an Apology
In closing, even a heartfelt apology can do only so much. Know that your
healing is not contingent upon whether the other person is ready to hear or
accept your apology. If you are able to offer an apology in humility and
truth, then you have reached the outer edge of what you can control.
Attempting to “get them to listen,” even though it is driven by your pain
and your shame, is a boundary violation, reflecting that you have exited
your own business and entered the business of another.
Your business is to offer the apology. The other person’s business is to
decide what to do with it. Stay present with your emotional journey and
your ever-expanding awareness, trusting these to grow your ability to be
more relationally skilled and better able to embody your truest essence
going forward.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
The degree to which you can offer a heartfelt “I’m sorry” to another is the
degree to which you can humbly embrace your imperfect nature, neither melting
into shame nor hardening into blame.

Apology Template
How we relate to the act of apologizing
is shaped by what we learned growing
up. Take a look at the section “Heartfelt
Apologies 101” (or download and print
the handout at
http://www.newharbinger.com/35814)

and put a star next to the ideas that were
and are part of your family of origin’s
apology story. Reflect on how you have
internalized these aspects of apology
and how they help you in your
relationships today. Notice the ideas that
you did not put a star next to—the
things you didn’t learn from your family
about apologizing. Which of these
remain difficult for you in your
relationships today? What are your
apology growing edges (what can you
get better at)?
Apology Story
Write about a time when you had to
apologize to someone you cared about
for something that you had said or done.
Answer these questions:

• What happened? (Tell the story of what
led up to your hurtful behavior, tell the
story of your hurtful behavior, and tell the
story of the aftermath.)
• How did you know that you needed to
apologize?
• In what ways was it difficult for you to
apologize? In what ways was it easy or
seamless for you to apologize?

• To what extent did you find yourself
attempting to change the other person’s
opinion or perception of you? Toward
what end? What was painful to you about
the other person’s opinion or perception
of you?
• In what ways did you (either with the
other person or on your own) explore the
difference between intent and impact?
What was helpful about that?
• Was there an amends action? What did
you commit to within yourself going
forward? What did that experience teach
you about how you want to be in the
world?

Working with Apology Growing
Edges
Ask someone you trust to talk with you
about what it’s like for him or her to
give you feedback about your behavior.
In other words, when you do something
that hurts this person’s feelings, what is
it like for him or her to approach you
with it? How open or defensive does he
or she find you to be?

Lesson 17

Forgive…Again and Again
Forgiveness is another name for freedom.
—Byron Katie

Years ago, I decided to include a unit on forgiveness in our “Marriage 101”
course, and as I dove more deeply into the topic, it became clear to me that
forgiveness is germane to all human relationships, and certainly all intimate
relationships. Just as we must know how to offer a heartfelt apology when we
hurt someone we care about, in order to fall in love and to stay in love, we
must understand how to forgive someone when he or she has hurt us. Yes,
forgiveness finds its way into all of our intimate relationships. This lesson
about forgiveness follows from the previous lesson about apology. Apology
and forgiveness exist in a sacred relationship with each other. The former
opens the door for the latter, even though we know that sometimes apologies
are not accepted, and sometimes forgiveness occurs in the absence of an
apology.

What Forgiveness Is and Isn’t
Forgiveness is a canceled debt (Markman and Stanley 2010). This definition
acknowledges that you could keep the person who hurt you in debt to you. You
are entitled to do that. But instead you are choosing to cancel the debt. I like
how this definition reminds us that forgiveness is active. Forgiveness means
that you have made a choice. Oprah Winfrey says that “forgiveness means
letting go of the wish that the past could be different.” When we have been
hurt, our instinct is to wish, deeply and fully, that the violation had not
happened. But that wish creates suffering because, indeed, it did happen and it
cannot un-happen. We are left only with the present moment and the future. In
this way, forgiveness is truly the centerpiece of all healing.
Forgiveness is a gift that you give yourself. When you forgive someone
who has hurt you, it says nothing about the offense itself. It does not mean that

you think the offense was no big deal. It does not excuse the other person’s
behavior. A lack of forgiveness is quite lousy for your emotional and physical
health (see, for example, Lawler-Row et al. 2008), so forgiveness frees you
from the chains of resentment and simmering anger. We know that some
people find it essential to forgive horrendous violations like assault, abuse, and
murder of a loved one, not because the offender “deserves” their forgiveness,
but in order to save their own lives and sanity.
So, how does forgiveness happen? Think back to that bucket of navy blue
paint from lesson 14. We can use that metaphor again here, imagining this time
that the bucket of navy blue paint is my story of the hurt: what happened; my
emotional pain; and what I believe it says about me, about the other person,
and about the world. Forgiveness is the white paint—when mixed in, it
transforms the very story itself. As I forgive, my story transforms. Over time
and with my commitment to forgive, when I think about that chapter of my
life, I may still feel emotional pain, but I will not experience suffering, which
is arguing with reality and remaining stuck in a thin story about how it “should
not” have happened. As the story changes, who I am in the story transforms as
well. Rather than the passive stance of a victim, I move toward the active and
empowered stance of a survivor.
At the risk of offering one metaphor too many, here’s another for you to
think about. When we make the choice to forgive someone, it is more as if we
are in recovery than cured. A while ago, I had a serious neck injury. I did all
the things I needed to get better: apply ice, get rest, and do physical therapy. It
took many months, and today I am back to doing all the activities and
exercises that I was doing before I was injured. But I would not say that I’m
cured. I would say that I am in recovery. If I push myself too hard at the gym
or if I sleep in a funky position, I feel pain. I also need to be a little more
careful with that part of my body. Forgiveness is like this. The pain lessens
over time, but we may remain especially vulnerable to “stuff” that touches us
in that same place.
My client, Charles, is recovering but is not cured. He has forgiven his
father for abandoning him and his mother when he was ten years old, yet like
an old injury, emotional pain still gets stirred up from time to time. For
example, when his own son turned ten, Charles experienced bouts of rage and
sadness—“How could he leave me when I was ten? I feel how much my son
needs me in his life!” It is helpful for Charles to be gentle with himself when
he experiences these waves of emotion, as he knows that telling himself to
“get over it already” will not work. He acknowledges that he is in recovery and

that, although he has forgiven his father, emotional pain remains. He tries to
stay present with the emotions as they arise, trusting their ebb and flow, and he
works on parenting himself from the inside—offering empathy to his ten-yearold self. In doing so, he is able to focus attention on what his presence offers to
his own son, and he swells with gratitude and pride for his relational heroism
(Real 1998).
Forgiveness is not like flipping a switch. Even if our minds demand,
“Forgive!” our hearts may have a different timeline. Forgiving cannot happen
all at once because, well, hurt hurts! In fact, research has found that there is
overlap between the parts of our brains that code physical pain and the parts
that code emotional pain (Johnson 2013). All pain is real and must be honored.
Yet it is also the case that we cannot simply sit around passively and wait for
forgiveness to simply arrive. The process that Charles uses—naming and
connecting with negative emotions when they arise—is helpful. Focusing on
what you feel grateful for also helps. Meditation is a powerful tool that can
help you move from a place of resentment and pain toward a place of
forgiveness. Research indicates that mindfulness, which is cultivated through
meditation, can aid forgiveness (Johns, Allen, and Gordon 2015). You’ll find a
forgiveness meditation at the end of this lesson.

Forgiving an Ex: Punished for a Crime She Didn’t Commit
Forgiveness after an intimate relationship has ended is important work, as
there is an internal and a relational price paid when we withhold forgiveness. If
you have not forgiven your ex for hurting you, you risk bringing that old pain
into your next intimate relationship, unfairly punishing your new partner for a
crime that he or she did not commit. Forgiving your ex—regardless of whether
he or she did anything to warrant it—frees you up from the chains of the past
so that you can love again.
Holding on to the pain of the past can be an effort to stay safe and
protected going forward, but the consequence is that your new partner is
fighting a ghost. We have no choice but to enter an intimate relationship fully,
trusting our resilience if we should happen to fall. Loving bravely involves
sharing with your new partner the ways in which your old pain has left you “in
recovery,” so that you can advocate for what you need, such as transparency
and truthful communication. This courageous path is quite different from the

hypervigilant and defensive stance that inevitably results when old fears and
lack of forgiveness are in the driver’s seat.

Forgiveness, Boundaries, Resentment, and Acceptance
People use the aphorism “forgive and forget,” but I don’t think the “forget”
part is possible, necessary, or advisable. When you choose to maintain a
relationship with the person who has hurt you, you both will need to be
mindful and careful going forward. For example, when I am doing therapy
with a couple recovering from infidelity, forgetting would not be a very smart
thing to do! Both partners need to talk about what kinds of safeguards make
sense—for example, sharing passwords, reducing alcohol consumption, or
staying with friends instead of in a hotel when traveling alone for business.
Protecting the relationship from the risk of further hurt is an essential aspect of
forgiveness.
Forgiveness and boundaries dance together, playing off of each other. If I
have been hurt by your behavior, I ought to reflect on what kind of boundary I
need in our relationship going forward. If I forgive you and then we manage
that boundary effectively, what is yielded is acceptance. I can accept you as
you are (and the situation as it is) because I am managing my boundaries in a
way that allows me to connect with you while protecting myself. If I forgive
you but do not effectively manage the boundary between us going forward, I
am likely to end up feeling violated again, which will breed feelings of
resentment within me.

Let’s look at this dance in action. A friend of mine was talking about how he
and his wife have learned to manage her chronic tardiness. When they have
plans to go out for the evening, he gets ready in a timely fashion. She does not.
For a long time, he would feel stressed out and hurt. He took her behavior
personally, feeling that if she loved him, she would be ready on time. He
would behave impatiently—reminding her of the time, asking her to hurry, and
stomping around the house. She would fight back—assuring him that she’d be
ready soon, telling him to relax, and labeling him as controlling. Sometimes
their whole evening would be ruined over this time-management problem. He
found himself feeling quite resentful.
He tried to forgive her for not being ready on time, telling himself, “She is
imperfect, just like me.” He tried to not take her behavior personally. He tried
to be more patient. However, none of that helped. He still ended up feeling
resentful. So he came up with a new plan. Now once he is ready, he makes
himself a drink and a really nice appetizer, and then he reads a book or
watches TV. Along with forgiving her for being imperfect, he also needed to
add a healthy boundary. He takes care of himself by starting the evening off
without her—but with some wine and cheese. He has found that by adding the
boundary, instead of resentment, he feels a sense of acceptance. In an
interesting footnote, his decision to add a boundary in this way has led to a
change in his wife’s behavior. She doesn’t want him to start the festivities
without her, so she gets ready faster. Love is nothing if not a dance!
We face questions about forgiveness on matters ranging from the ordinary
(How do I cope with a chronically tardy partner?) to the profound (Do I need
to forgive my father for sexually abusing me in order to heal? Should I forgive
my fiancé for hitting me?). When it comes to profound forgiveness questions
like these, know that the path to clarity is tender and deeply personal.
Questions like these are best answered in collaboration with a mental health
professional who specializes in working with trauma. Appendix 1 has more
information about trauma, and appendix 2 has information about finding a
therapist.

Although each person’s journey to healing from abuse is unique, there are
some common elements. Survivors need to work on managing their relational
boundaries in order to ensure their own physical and emotional safety.
Survivors need to grieve the loss of who they were (and what they believed
about the world) before the abuse occurred. Finally, if a survivor’s suffering
involves self-blame for any aspect of the abuse (for not telling anybody, for
staying in the relationship, and so on), he or she will need self-forgiveness.
This forgiveness work is separate and apart from whether and how he or she
forgives the abuser.

Trusting Your Resilience
We know that forgiveness is a process, not a one-time event. We know that
“forgive and forget” is neither possible nor desirable. And we know that, for
our own good, we ought to forgive someone who has hurt us even when we
are no longer in a relationship with him or her. Even though withholding
forgiveness can make us feel safe, as if we are behind a shield of sorts, our
least desirable course of action is to remain in a relationship while stuck in
simmering resentment.
Forgiving someone and remaining in a relationship with that person is
brave, as it requires vulnerability. It requires us to ask for what we need, and it
requires us to take the emotional risk of getting back into the ring (Brown
2015). And the truth is, even when we do everything we can to ensure healing
—including accountability, boundaries, and amends actions—we may still be
hurt again, reminding us that the ultimate trusting relationship must be with
ourselves. We must be willing to say, “I trust my wisdom in staying and
forgiving, and I trust my resilience to get up if I am knocked down again.”

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Understanding when and how to forgive frees you from the past, allowing you to
show up fully for the present.

Family Grudges

Write a journal entry about what you saw
when you were growing up regarding
forgiveness. Write down three things you
were you taught explicitly or directly about
forgiveness from family, friends, school,
and/or religious education. Then write
down three things you learned about
forgiveness just by watching the adults in
your life. Did the people who raised you
hold grudges—remaining stuck in a lack of
forgiveness? Or, at the other extreme, did
they get stuck in cycles of mistreatment
because they struggled to hold others
accountable for their actions?
What Gets in the Way?
Write about a time when you needed to
forgive someone. First, tell the story of
what happened—how were you hurt? Next,
write about the accountability process (if
there was one). Did you bring the issue to
the other person’s attention? Did the other
person bring the issue to your attention?
Did you ask for an apology, or did the
other person volunteer an apology?
Perhaps there was no accountability
process, and you needed to find a way to
forgive that person anyway. If this was the
case, write about what you think got in the
way of the other person being accountable
for his or her actions and apologizing to
you. What blocked his or her apology? For
example, was the other person blocked by
a cultural, gendered, or family story that

says apologizing would make him or her
“lose face” or appear “weak”? Was the
other person blocked by a story that he or
she did nothing wrong and you were
“overreacting”—in other words, not able to
distinguish between intent and impact?
Finally, write about your process of
forgiving that person. What helped you
forgive that person? What got in the way?
How do you feel today when this painful
issue comes to mind? How is your feeling
today different from how you felt about the
issue before you were able to forgive?
Perhaps writing about this is bringing to
your awareness that you are struggling to
forgive the other person. If this is the case,
what can you use from this lesson to help
you move toward forgiveness for your own
sake and for the sake of your intimate
relationship—now or going forward?
Building Your Forgiveness Muscles
One of the most gifted and beloved
teachers of meditation, Jack Kornfield
(2016), offers the following forgiveness
meditation. Find a comfortable and quiet
place to sit. Quiet your mind, breathe into
the area around your heart, and begin to
recite these words. As you recite them, stay
present with the images and feelings that
come up. Recite this meditation until you
feel a shift within yourself: a release, an
opening, a softening.

There are many ways that I have been
harmed by others, abused or abandoned,
knowingly or unknowingly, in thought, word,
or deed. I now remember the many ways
others have hurt or harmed me, wounded
me, out of fear, pain, confusion, and anger. I
have carried this pain in my heart too long.
To the extent that I am ready, I offer them
forgiveness. To those who have caused me
harm, I offer my forgiveness, I forgive you.

Practice this meditation regularly until you
notice that when you think of the person
and the situation, you feel less emotionally
upset (angry, sad, or afraid) and more
neutral or peaceful. You can find this
meditation, along with other reminders
about apologizing and forgiving, in the
online “Guide to Heartfelt Apologies and
Forgiveness” at
http://www.newharbinger.com/35814.
Know that even if you move yourself into a
more forgiving place right now, events
down the road may stir up old pain. This
practice will be here for you if and when
that happens!

Lesson 18

Value Presence
Each time you love, love as deeply as if it were forever.
—Audre Lorde

As my best friend, Alexandra Folz (whose poetic words open this book),
says, “Presence is hard work.” I agree. I think about presence as the degree
to which we are in an interaction with another person. The degree to which
we are “showing up.” Like in the old-school game, the Hokey Pokey, think
about whether just part of you is present (“I put my right foot in”) or all of
you is present (“I put my whole self in”). When we are working to be fully
present with someone, we are paying attention with our minds so that we
can listen and contribute, and we are paying attention with our hearts so
that we can empathize. The energy of presence is powerful. It grows love.
Offering our heartfelt presence to another person creates love and nurtures
love. We know this in our bones.
Despite the fact that we intuitively know this, presence seems to be in
short supply these days. We are living in an incredibly fast-paced digital
age, which has created a strange irony. Between online dating, texting, and
social media, we are arguably more connected than ever before (Turkle
2015). But we also seem to be less present than ever before. Listening while
texting. Texting while watching a show. Watching a show while scrolling
Facebook. We seem to rarely put our whole self in one place at one time.
Technology has become an integral part of every aspect of our lives—even
our love lives. It is not uncommon for therapy clients to bring out their
phones midsession in order to read me a text exchange they had with their
intimate partner. We look for love online, and we conduct the business of
love online as well!
This lesson will expand your awareness about how our collective love
affair with our handheld devices affects our ability to be present for love.
Presence is indeed hard work, but it is work worth doing in order to love

and be loved. (Just a heads-up: I promise not to trash technology or urge
you to throw out your phone. I’m quite enamored with mine!)

Technology and Love: A Square Peg in a Round Hole
I have begun to offer workshops about technology and love, which is a fun
topic to talk about because it’s so relevant, complex, and confusing. I feel
clear that some of our current difficulties in love stem from the fact that we
have become quite entwined with our devices. Therefore, we seem to be
importing our experiences with and our expectations of technology into our
love lives. It’s as if our storylines have become confused, resulting in a
square-peg-round-hole situation. These two things that just don’t fit
together. We have to make sure we understand the differences between the
energy of technology and the energy of love. The following table helps us
discern one type of “energy” from the other.
The Energy of Technology

The Energy of Love

All about me

All about we

Consumers

Givers or servers

More (more distraction, more choice)

Less (less distraction, less choice)

New and better

Commitment, acceptance, and gratitude

Fast and efficient

Requires time to grow and time to maintain

Doing

Being

Answers

Mysteries and paradoxes

Let’s look at each of these contrasts:

Technology is self-centered. It’s all about me and it’s all about
consuming. Yes, I know that people all over the world use
technology in order to serve humanity and care for our planet, but
many of our day-to-day interactions with our devices are about our
individual needs and wants. Love is us-centered. In an intimate
relationship, we must shift to a “we” perspective, caring for the
space between partners and figuring out how to optimize individual
happiness while tending to the relationship.
Technology promises newer, better, faster. The moment I see your
new phone, mine suddenly seems clunky and retro by comparison,
and I want to upgrade ASAP, craving the rush of novelty. Love
offers acceptance, gratitude, and commitment. Intimate relationships
require us to commit and then invest and nurture what we already
have for the long term.
Technology purports efficiency and convenience. High-speed
Internet, time-saving apps, and goods delivered right to our
doorstep. People even say they opt for online dating in order to save
time and hassle. In my more cynical moments, I feel quite
discouraged about our quest to streamline our intimate relationships
—what could we possibly be doing that is more valuable than giving
and receiving love? My students insist that technology helps them
weed out the people they wouldn’t want to connect with so that they
can get to the giving and receiving love part more quickly! I
suppose we must agree to disagree. Love springs from growth and
maintenance work. Love is not about efficiency. Love requires time
to grow—you couldn’t possibly feel about someone on the fourth
date the way you will feel about him or her on your five-year
anniversary.
Technology is about doing. It is goal-driven, task-oriented, and
purposeful, getting us from A to B. Love is about being. While
couples certainly do all kinds of things together, the heart of an
intimate relationship is about being—being present, being together,
being witnesses to each other’s lives.

Technology gives us answers. We use technology to seek answers
to so many of life’s questions, both big and small, from seeking
medical advice and driving directions to remembering the name of
that actress in that film we adored. Love requires us to welcome
mystery and paradox. In our intimate relationships, very little is ever
solved, fixed, or answered. Instead, loving and being loved teaches
us how to sit ever more comfortably with an unknown, with
agreeing to disagree, and with places of multiple truths.
So what are we to do? How do we make use of all of what technology
has to offer without short-changing what is needed to support the
flourishing of love? The answer is not to throw out our phones or wax
poetic about the good ol’ days. The answer, I believe, is to practice
discernment—to make choices from a place of conscious awareness. When
we catch ourselves expecting from love what we expect from technology—
efficiency, ease, speed—we can name that (“There I go again, expecting
something unrealistic from my intimate relationship”), and we can remind
ourselves that we have no choice but to embrace (or at least tolerate) the
messiness of love.
We can also start expecting more from ourselves and each other and do
the vast majority of our loving face-to-face, not screen-to-screen. How
about using technology simply as a means of getting from here to there and
nothing more, viewing online communication simply as a vehicle for
getting us to the same space at the same time (“Let’s meet for lunch at
noon”)?
I find it troubling that couples are increasingly opting to have their
fights online, a phenomenon that Dr. Sheri Turkle writes about in her book
Reclaiming Conversation (2015). People prefer fighting by text for a couple
reasons. There will be a transcript they can look back on of who said what
to whom, and conflict feels less messy and out of control because they can
think about what they want to say before sending. Yet, what is the price we
pay for these perceived benefits? What is lost? These longings—for an
accountability record and for neatness—reflect that we have muddied our
story of technology and our story of love. As we know, conflict is to be
navigated, not eliminated. Intimacy, indeed our very humanity, is found in
those rich and messy places—a foot that meets another foot as a peace
offering, a compassionate gaze that softens an angry heart. Our bodies and

our faces speak a language that no emoji can ever hope to capture. Our
bravest work in love is to remember and to honor the power of our
presence.

“Little p” Presence
Honoring the power of presence requires us to grow our self-awareness
about two separate but related ideas. I call these ideas “little p” presence
and “big P” Presence.
“Little p” presence is about how we show up for little moments, for
microinteractions.
“Big P” Presence is about how we show up for an intimate
relationship, how much we are in the Hokey Pokey of love.
Our “little p” presence is very important in our intimate relationships,
but it is subtle and a bit sneaky. Researchers have found that when two
people have a conversation in the presence of a cell phone, feelings of
interpersonal closeness and trust are significantly compromised. They
report feeling less empathy and understanding from each other (Przybylski
and Weinstein 2012). It seems that we pay a pretty steep price for our desire
to be connected at all times. Afraid to miss something out there, we end up
missing something right here, trading our “little p” presence for some vague
and ephemeral connection in “phone world” (Ansari 2015).
When it comes to our technology, it turns out that we tend to have a
double standard, desiring the full attention of another while giving only a
portion of our own. I’m guilty of this. I sometimes feel neglected and
disrespected if Todd checks his e-mail as I’m talking to him, but if he asks
me to put down my phone as he talks, I tend to get a bit defensive, sure that
I can adequately attend to him while also scrolling my Instagram feed. But I
can’t. None of us can. Multitasking does not work, and our intimate
relationships need and deserve our “little p” presence. As Turkle (2015)
says, “Think of unitasking as the next big thing” (321). See the online guide
“Technology Best Practices” for support in bringing your whole self to your
relationships (http://www.newharbinger.com/35814).

“Big P” Presence
“Big P” presence is about commitment. For those who are looking for love,
the wonders of technology offer a quantity of potential partners that was
unimaginable a generation or two ago. No longer limited to the guy or gal
next door, today we can cast a wide net in our search for love. Although this
fact is not problematic in and of itself, there are consequences to loving in
the age of abundance, and, as usual, relational self-awareness is our best
compass.
It turns out that more is not necessarily better. In his 2004 book The
Paradox of Choice, psychologist Barry Schwartz cites research showing
that our desire for variety ends up reducing our feelings of satisfaction once
we have made a choice. More options tend not to make us feel happier.
Comedian and astute observer of culture, Aziz Ansari, applied Schwartz’s
ideas to the world of intimate relationships in his book Modern Romance
(2015). Seduced into thinking that more choice is better, we spend countless
hours on dating apps, shopping for love in a manner not completely unlike
the manner in which we shop for shoes and wondering whether Mr. or Ms.
Right is just one more swipe away. We must remember that at the other end
of that profile is a living, breathing, three-dimensional human being, just
like us.
Once in an intimate relationship, instead of asking, “Am I happy here?”
we seem to be increasingly asking the question, “Could I be happier
somewhere else?” (Perel 2015). This consumer mentality (Doherty 2013)
doesn’t serve our intimate relationships very well. When we decide to make
a commitment to one person and go through relational rituals (moving in
together, becoming engaged and so on), it is essential to trust ourselves to
have made a good-enough choice of a partner and cultivate happiness
within that relationship. Instead of looking for all the places where “the
grass may be greener,” commitment to another person means that we
choose to weed and water our own yard (Markman and Stanley 2010). This
is not about settling. It is about making the conscious choice to focus on
what you like, love, and admire about your partner and to defocus on the
rest.
Yes, we live in an era of choice, from an entire aisle full of breakfast
cereal (unheard of a generation ago) to dating apps that offer a seemingly
endless lineup of potential mates. But love is about pairing up by paring

down. Love is about committing to “the one,” honoring the fact that even
though we know we could keep looking, we choose “us.” One of my
students shared with me that she and her girlfriend ritualized an important
step in their commitment to each other by lighting a candle, opening a
bottle of wine, and deleting all of their online dating apps. Lovely! “Big P”
Presence is about being able to say, “I know there are other people out
there, and other relationships that I could create, but I choose this one.”
In order to love fully and bravely, we must be willing to offer our “big
P” Presence to the one we are with, symbolically and concretely letting go
of the “what ifs.” This takes guts, doesn’t it? It is tempting to keep a little
thread of a storyline open with a couple of other people just in case it
doesn’t work out, but this is not our bravest path. Unless we want our
partner to keep outside dialogue with other potential mates while
committing to us, we are better off practicing the Golden Rule. In addition,
it is a self-fulfilling prophecy. If we do not put our “whole self” in, we do
not truly give love its best chance of success. Even if we wish it were
otherwise, intimate relationships are fragile and need the protection of “big
P” Presence to take root and grow.
There is another aspect of “big P” Presence that is more subtle than
relationship commitment—an aspect that is about being present to the
possibility in front of you. You don’t have to be in a committed relationship
to be present! Woven into the very definition of dating is the process of
weighing options, imagining possibilities, and making comparisons. Dating
means spending time communicating online with people and going on
(maybe lots of) first dates. Dating is about exploring, and as you explore, let
self-awareness be your greatest guide. Self-aware dating means valuing
presence—both little and big. It’s easy to see how “little p” presence is
useful on a date. By keeping your phone silenced and put away, you can
bring your full attention to the interaction between you and your date,
which will help you access the vital data from within your gut—your deep
and wise intuitive knowing.
But does it seem strange that “big P” Presence—putting our whole self
in—would also apply to dating? A graduate student of mine shared with me
a piece of advice that had been given to her by a dating coach: follow one
storyline through to the end. This piece of advice is an invitation to “big P”
Presence. Rather than going on three first dates a week, which, thanks in

part to technology, is entirely possible, pursue one possibility at a time. This
requires restraint and willingness to stand outside of our cultural belief that
more is better. Following one storyline through allows the possibility of
bringing your fullest self to this exact moment, this very opportunity. Rather
than checking your matches in the bathroom on your first date, what
happens when you suspend everything else that is happening and bring your
full self to this possibility?
If part of you is protesting this idea—“But she is also probably checking
her matches in the bathroom! It’s just what’s done!”—take a moment and
sink into how this would feel in reverse. When I imagine someone checking
matches while on a date with me, I feel hurt and ashamed, as if I am
somehow not enough, even for just an evening. Even still, it is not easy to
offer something to someone when we are not sure it is what we are getting
in return—sort of like a game of Vulnerability Hot Potato. Who will offer
their presence first? At moments like this, when I want to hold myself to a
certain standard yet I am not sure the other person will, I find it helpful to
think about the Mahatma Gandhi quote, “Be the change you wish to see in
the world.” I can embody what I desire in return. So, here, “big P” Presence
doesn’t necessarily mean “till death do us part.” Here, “big P” Presence is
about stepping into the possibility of love by being fully with the one who
is in front of us, right here, right now.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Love is created and nurtured when we bring our attention to the present moment,
and in the digital age, this is more precious and difficult than ever.

My Phone and Me
Take this opportunity to do a fearless
moral inventory (Alcoholics
Anonymous lingo) about your
relationship with your phone by creating
a table with three columns:
Before/During/After. Over the next few

days, take notes on this table about how
you feel before, during, and after you
scroll through social media. Make sure
in your notes that you include any
specific observations you have about the
impact that your use of social media has
on your intimate relationship. As you
look over the data you have collected,
what do you notice? What feels
troubling? What feels reassuring?
Technology Best Practices
Based on what you learned in the
previous exercise about your
relationship with your phone, identify
which of the following practices would
help you live with more presence. Select
two or three from the list below and
stick with them!

• Unitasking: If you are talking to
someone, talk to someone. If you are
watching a show, watch a show. If you are
checking Facebook, check Facebook.
Take one task to completion before
beginning the next one.
• The boring bits: Related to the
unitasking challenge, see what happens if
you opt not to use your phone to
mindlessly fill in the “boring bits” (Turkle
2015). For example, when you are in the
checkout line at the grocery store, instead

of looking at your phone, look around,
daydream, ponder, or strike up a
conversation with the cashier or the
customer next to you. Feeling competent
and confident at small talk is important
for those looking for love as well as for
those in love.
• Increasing intervals: Set an interval for
how often you can check your phone that
is longer than the interval you have now.
For example, if you check every ten
minutes, challenge yourself to check
every twenty minutes.
• Phone home: Leave your phone in one
central place in your home instead of
carrying it around with you.
• Shut it down: Choose a daily
technology end time, maybe an hour
before you go to sleep.
• Stimulus control: Especially if you are
online dating, put the business of
checking your matches on stimulus
control. Instead of mindlessly checking
on the train to work and in your dentist’s
waiting room, create a ritual for checking.
Love is sacred and deserves nothing less.
Check at a particular time, in a particular
place—for example, after dinner on your
balcony.

Putting Your Whole Self In
Write about the degree to which you
embody “big P” (presence) in your life.
When on a date, how fully do you show
up? To what degree do you find your
attention wandering? To what degree do
you find yourself feeling closed off and
defensive? To what degree do you allow
yourself to imagine the possibility of
building a relationship with this person?
To what degree do you compare this
person to another, a process that takes
you out of the moment?
When you are in an intimate relationship
with someone, to what degree are you
able to commit yourself to the
relationship? To what degree do you
keep other possibilities open (via online
or other kinds of communication)? What
is the story that supports that behavior?
What are the thoughts and feelings that
come up for you around commitment?
What makes it difficult for you to put
your whole self in—fear of getting hurt,
thoughts that someone better might
come along, and so forth? What is the
impact of not fully entering the intimate
relationship—on you, on the other
person, and on the relationship itself?

Lesson 19

Be on Your Own Team
One of the best guides to how to be self-loving is to give ourselves the
love we are often dreaming about receiving from others.
—bell hooks

We are stuck. Again. I sit in session and watch Nicole turn away from
Andrew, her shoulders slumped and her head heavy with defeat. “There’s
just nothing I can say or do. Nothing.” Andrew and I hold eye contact for a
long time, and I say, “Andrew, I can only imagine how alone you must feel
right now. Nicole wants nothing more than to be with you as you two face
this problem. To partner with you. She’s knocking on your door, but it’s so
hard for you to let her in, isn’t it?”
It is clear to me that the weight of Andrew’s shame is crushing him, and
I am afraid that it is slowly killing their relationship. He has been
unemployed for many months; her part-time job and his parents’
contributions keep them afloat. He is irritable most of the time, and she
feels as if she is walking on eggshells. She is frustrated and lonely. Her true
essence is problem-solver and cheerleader, and I am impressed by the fact
that she does not blame him or shame him. From her perspective, this is
their problem—their choices got them into this mess, and both of them need
to get themselves out of it.
Andrew does not share this perspective. He is drowning in shame, yet
he struggles mightily when I use that word—instead he prefers to talk about
feeling stressed and feeling mad at himself. From his perspective, he has
screwed up big-time, and his joblessness reflects his inadequacy. Therefore,
anything Nicole says or does—forwarding a job posting to him, offering to
edit his résumé, inquiring about the family budget—feels to him like an
assault. It is as if Andrew is stuck in a deep and dark hole, and Nicole is on
the ground above, desperate to be with her partner, as she knows he’s
suffering tremendously. Her questions, comments, and concerns are

intended to be tools—a flashlight, a rope, a ladder that can help him out, or
at least a snack to keep his energy up. Tragically, her attempts to be
involved feel to Andrew as if she is throwing rocks into the hole or taunting
him. So he responds critically and defensively, sighing and saying
something like, “You don’t get it. That’s never going to work!” Nicole goes
back to biting her tongue and continuing to tiptoe, giving Andrew what he
says he needs—space to figure it out on his own.
When Nicole retreats, she is left without a partner and terrified about the
future. And when she leaves Andrew in the hole, their relationship grows
ever more distant. And guess what else happens? Andrew’s shame wins.
Again. She walks away, and he spends another long day trapped with his
shame telling him this is exactly where he belongs. Andrew is embroiled in
the fight of his life, and the very tool he needs is one for which he has
tremendous contempt. That tool? Self-compassion.
Self-compassion is the only way out of that hole. Self-compassion is the
only way he will be able to let Nicole near him. Without it, he will keep her
at arm’s length because it’s too risky. Even if she could be a gentle, totally
empathic, perfectly attuned angel every moment of every day, Andrew’s
shame would continue to stand guard, looking for the slightest evidence that
she is belittling and undermining him. In the absence of self-compassion,
Andrew’s shame runs the show—unchecked and merciless. It is devastating
his relationship with himself and his relationship with his wife. And, by the
way, his shame-loaded story of who he is also compromises his ability to
get a job, as it keeps him from proactively and confidently reaching out and
advocating for himself. There is no doubt about it, Andrew is stuck, and in
order to get out, he must get on his own team.

Shame: A Wily Competitor
As Andrew and Nicole’s story shows, shame packs a “one-two punch,”
hurting not only our relationship with ourselves but also our relationship
with the people we love. In spite of this, shame is a common emotion. We
may wish to never feel shame, but it’s more reasonable to expect that we
will feel shame from time to time. Relational self-awareness then means
knowing how to identify it and how to work with it when we feel it
creeping up on us.

First things first: shame and guilt are different. If we have done
something that hurts someone we care about, we will likely experience
feelings of guilt, and these feelings can actually be helpful—a sort of red
flag from within letting us know that we have wandered from who and how
we want to be. Guilt can serve as a motivator. Our guilty feelings lead us to
make a repair with the person we have hurt. Our guilty feelings may drive
us to take a fearless look at ourselves and our choices. Guilt tends to be
specific and fixable—it is about what we have done and how to repair it.
Shame is different. Shame is more diffuse and static. Shame is about
who we are. Guilt says, “I did something wrong,” and shame says, “I am
wrong.” And, unlike guilt, which may drive us to be more conscientious
and thoughtful, shame is an ineffective and cruel motivator. Shame is
sneaky. It offers the illusion of being a motivator, lulling us into thinking
that we need it in order to do what needs to be done.
Andrew is sure that unless he continues to berate himself, he will stop
trying to look for a job at all. Shame keeps him from seeing how, in fact, the
opposite is possible and preferable—that he could motivate himself from a
place of self-compassion. And unlike guilt, which can be used to drive us to
repair a relational problem, shame compromises connection between self
and other. This is the case with Andrew and Nicole. Andrew’s shame
creates painful distance and disengagement in his intimate relationship.
This is true for all of us: I can only love you to the degree that I love
myself.

Self-Compassion: I Am on My Own Team
Self-compassion is a powerful antidote to shame. In fact, it’s really the only
antidote to shame. The heart of self-compassion is deep friendship with
one’s self—I am on my own team. Self-compassion is not a new idea here,
as it has shown up in various places throughout the book. Every time we
engage in the Name-Connect-Choose process, we are practicing selfcompassion, because we are attending to and valuing what lies within us.
Every time we enact healthy boundaries by saying yes when we mean yes
and no when we mean no, we are practicing self-compassion. Every time
we return our attention to the present moment, dropping self-criticism and
negative self-talk, we are practicing self-compassion.

So what is self-compassion? Dr. Kristin Neff (2011; 2012), the leading
researcher in this area, says there are three elements of self-compassion:
Self-kindness. “Self-compassion entails being warm and
understanding toward ourselves when we suffer, fail, or feel
inadequate, rather than ignoring our pain or flagellating ourselves
with self-criticism.”
Common humanity. Being compassionate with ourselves involves
recognizing that “suffering and personal inadequacy are part of the
shared human experience.” Shame says, “I am the only one who
feels like this.” Self-compassion says, “Everyone screws up or feels
lousy from time to time.”
Mindfulness. When we are mindful, we bring our attention into the
present moment (neither fast-forwarding to an imagined catastrophic
future nor rewinding to old stories about the past), and we adopt a
nonjudgmental and receptive state of mind in which we observe our
thoughts and feelings rather than trying to suppress or deny them.
Mindfulness is the difference between thinking, “I am such a loser”
and thinking, “Oh, here comes that old, played-out story about how
I am such a loser. I had better figure out how to be compassionate
with myself in the face of this bull.”
Self-compassion is not the same as self-esteem. It’s not about hollowly
propping yourself up or mindlessly offering yourself affirmations about
your awesomeness. Self-compassion is also not about letting yourself off
the hook. It is about embracing your imperfections and making a
commitment to be gentle with yourself. As Dr. Neff says, self-compassion
is about treating yourself the way you would treat a good friend. Life is
hard and full of unforeseen challenges and disappointments—all of which
are much easier to navigate when you are on your own team.

Self-Compassion in the Name of Love
My work with Andrew and Nicole continues, bit by bit and step by step.
Andrew recently decided to begin individual therapy in order to address the

roots of his shame. He told Nicole that he was only going to individual
therapy “for her.” Rather than feeling discouraged by his continued
difficulty claiming that his well-being is worth fighting for, I shared with
him that I think that’s an act of relational heroism (Real 1998). Tackling his
lack of self-compassion head-on is a way of fighting for his marriage. His
marriage is so valuable to him that even though he would not be able to
declare for himself that he is worth fighting for, he is willing to do it for
love. It is my hope that, over time, he will take his emotional well-being
seriously, but for right now, self-compassion in the name of love will have
to be enough.
Even though we all deserve to be compassionate with ourselves for our
own sake (because we are worthy of such gentleness), sometimes we need a
different kind of motivation. We can motivate ourselves to practice selfcompassion in order to be a more open-hearted intimate partner, parent, or
friend. Whatever your motivation, see what happens when you commit to
living and loving with self-compassion.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
We must relate to ourselves with compassion in order to be able to offer the
same to our intimate partner.

Comfort Meditation
The seeds of self-compassion are
planted by those who have shown
compassion to us, especially when we
were young. This exercise is intended to
help you identify who in your life has
provided you with comfort—whose
words and actions have helped you feel
better. As Peggy O’Mara (former editor
of Mothering magazine) says, “The way
we talk to our children becomes their
inner voice.”

Begin by meditating on the idea of
comfort. Sit quietly with your eyes
closed, and bring forth images of
comfort. Who in your life offers or has
offered you comfort in a way that felt
“just right”? Imagine you are on your
back looking up at the sky. As a
memory of comfort comes into your
awareness, imagine it is a soft cloud
moving into your line of vision. Sit with
this memory for a few moments. What
were you upset about? What did that
person say or do that was so helpful?
Why? As you connect with the memory,
notice what you feel in your body and
where you feel it. Then imagine the
cloud moving away, out of your line of
vision. Sit quietly and notice whether
another memory of comfort comes up
for you. If so, connect with it. When you
are done with this meditation, write
about the memory or memories that
came up for you. Write about the people
who offered you comfort and what they
said or did.
Those Who Dwell Within
The next time you are having a hard
time—feeling irritable, feeling weepy,
or wanting to isolate yourself—turn
your attention inward and notice how
you are talking to yourself. Are you
treating yourself harshly? Are you
feeling shame? If so, what happens if

you pull up one of the comfort
memories you identified in the previous
meditation? What happens if you begin
to talk to yourself the way this person
would talk to you? Does the shame
begin to feel more like self-compassion?
Do you find yourself beginning to feel
more relaxed, open, and calm?
Care of the Self
Photocopy or download (from
http://www.newharbinger.com/35814)
the following list of common selfsoothing strategies and keep it handy for
times when you need it. Feel free to add
your own!

• Talk to a friend, intimate partner, or
family member.
• Write in your journal.
• Take a bath.
• Get out in nature.
• Do yoga or another form of exercise.
• Hang out with a pet.
• Watch TV or a movie.

• Sing.
• Dance.
• Paint, draw, or color.
• Cook.
• Build something.
• Clean.
• Meditate.

Lesson 20

Ride the Waves
To listen to your soul is to stop fighting with life—to stop fighting when
things fall apart; when they don’t go our way, when we get sick, when we
are betrayed or mistreated or misunderstood.
—Elizabeth Lesser

During the last few days, I have been noticing my reactions to writing this
final lesson. I watch myself sit down at my computer, fully intent on
writing, but suddenly everything else takes precedence—an Instagram post,
a phone call, a snack. This is a new and different problem for me, so I have
been wondering what to make of it. I notice the fear-loaded questions that
accompany my dillydallying—Is this writer’s block? What if it never lifts?
What if I miss my deadline?
I name these fear-loaded stories what they are, which allows me to dive
a little deeper. As I quiet my mind and turn my attention inward to my
emotional world, I connect to sadness rising up. I am sad to be finishing this
book, as I deeply enjoy my quiet writing days, music in the background,
dog in my lap. This chapter of my life is ending, and I don’t feel quite ready
to let it go.
This lesson, “Ride the Waves,” is about trusting life—so it’s fitting that
this is exactly what I need to do in order to write it. This lesson is about
how much more open we are to love when we allow rather than force,
wonder instead of control, and exhale deeply into all that we do not know
and cannot know. Although each lesson in this book certainly reflects some
aspect of my own growing edges, no lesson captures my core challenge as a
human being more than this lesson does. Aha, I think to myself. No wonder
my attention is everywhere but here. I allow myself to sit with this
awareness. I put one hand on my heart and take some deep breaths, sending
some compassion to myself.

For so many of us, making that internal shift from resisting to allowing
is really difficult, and we can get ourselves quite stuck fighting against
reality as it exists right here and right now (bills, flat tires, and all). Dan
Siegel describes it as the difference between a “no” space and a “yes” space
(2010). When we’re caught up in that “no” space, not only do we create
suffering within ourselves, but our intimate relationship also pays a price.
To our partner we are likely to feel prickly and hard to approach. Our
partner may feel as if he or she is walking on eggshells. There’s no doubt,
intimate relationships go more smoothly when we commit ourselves to not
letting the rigid and controlling parts of ourselves run the show. But that can
feel easier said than done. What can help us make that all-important shift
from no to yes? Our trusted Name-Connect-Choose process!
The first step is to name it (“There I go again, wanting answers that I
cannot have yet, and struggling to sit in the unknown.”) Next, we can
connect with how this impatient and mistrustful place feels inside—the
heaviness in the belly, the tightness in the chest, the swirling inside of the
head. Inhale deeply and slowly and whisper, “Don’t know” on the exhale.
Finally, we can choose to redirect ourselves. We may choose to direct our
attention toward someone we love, as turning toward a relational
connection invites us to be present, giving us comfort or at least distraction.
All we really can ever trust is the present moment anyway, so we may as
well dive into it. Or we may choose to direct our attention to a task at hand,
finding some little piece of the universe that we actually can control—a
load of laundry, a piece of music, or an e-mail. Or we may choose to shift
our energy with physical movement—a workout, shooting some baskets, or
walking the dog. Or we may choose to rest.
I know that when I can shift myself into a space of greater surrender and
trust, I can engage more deeply and happily in my intimate relationship, and
this is true for all of us. The goal I have is to allow myself to ride waves of
life and to trust myself as I do. That is a mighty goal for all of us. The
waves are within us and the waves are life itself. Riding the waves that arise
within means allowing ourselves to visit the full array of human emotions—
from fear, to despair, to ecstasy—and return to a middle ground. Riding the
waves of life is an invitation to meet life on life’s terms—terms that may be
quite different from what we had imagined, planned for, and aspired to.
Elizabeth Lesser, who is quoted in the beginning of this lesson, offers a
beautiful image for this moment: when we find ourselves paddling furiously

against the current, it is time to let go of the oars. As she says, the secret is
“to slow down, to feel deeply, to see ourselves clearly, to surrender to
discomfort and uncertainty and to wait” (Lesser 2005, 270). Surrendering
like this requires self-awareness, and it also grows self-awareness.

Thinking My Way Into Trust
Sometimes, as in my example above, we can give ourselves what we need
to slow down and let go of angst, but sometimes we need a little help from a
trustworthy guide. Our goal is to create an intimate relationship in which
our partner can serve as that trustworthy guide when we need him or her to
lead. And vice versa. It’s all a big circle—riding the waves opens us to love
more deeply in an intimate relationship, and an intimate relationship also
helps us more effectively ride the waves.
Here’s an example of how an intimate relationship can help us inhabit
that “yes” space of sweet surrender. Our son, Brian, was about nine years
old, and it was the day of his piano recital. He was nervous, and we were
doing our best to help him manage his nerves. Everything seemed to be
clicking along until the performance began, at which point he started to
whisper to us that he couldn’t do it. Todd and I took him out into the
hallway and tried to help him feel better. Nothing was working, and he was
getting increasingly upset. Todd pulled me aside and said, “Al, it’s not
happening. We have to let it go.” I could feel the full force of my resistance
kick in. “Of course he’s doing it. He has to do it. His name is in the
program. The program has begun. There’s no way to let his teacher know.
He’s got to rally.” After another minute or so of discussion, it clicked for
me, and I will never forget how it felt. Here’s what I said to myself: Todd
feels clear. He has let this go. He is okay with letting this go. I trust Todd. I
can let go.
I had to think my way into surrender with logic, not emotion, as my
guide. The grip of my resistance was tight, but each thought loosened me,
finger by finger—Todd feels clear. He has let this go. He is okay with letting
this go. I trust Todd. I can let go. I have every confidence that without Todd
as my guide, I would have remained stuck in that moment with Brian, going
round and round, fighting with the reality of the moment. I used my

relationship with Todd to ride what was a truly mighty wave. Am I taking
the imagery too far if I say that Todd was my surfboard?
So, we made our decision. Brian was not going to get onstage. The three
of us walked back into the auditorium. I snuck onstage between performers
and whispered in his teacher’s ear. When I returned to our seats, Brian was
sitting between his uncle and his older cousin. Both guys had their arms
around him, and his uncle kissed the top of his head. I took my seat in the
row behind Brian, and tears streamed down my face. When I let go of my
old panicky story that we have to fight, push, and control in order for things
to be okay, another definition of okay bloomed right in front of my eyes.
Our son sat enveloped in the arms of men who love him. He was okay. The
moment was okay. I watched him be granted the opportunity to know that
the love he receives is not contingent on whether he is performing—
literally!
My ability to surrender to Todd was good for our relationship. My
leaning on Todd affirmed to him how much he means to me, and my
willingness to lean on him affirmed to me that I don’t have to do it all alone.
I feel emotional as I write this, even though it happened years ago, because
it captures for me the heart of an intimate relationship. We cannot do it on
our own. None of us can. And in an intimate relationship, we don’t have to.
When we are caught up fighting with life, our partner may not be, so we can
soften and lean on the relationship, trusting that’s exactly what it is there
for.

“How About That?!”
Some of us need a little help from a friend in order to find that state of
surrender. Others of us live there every day, making surrender into a trait,
not just a state. My friend Annie Burnside is a writer who hosts “soul
circles” in her home—a spiritual book club of sorts. At one gathering, she
shared a story that stuck with me and that shows how riding the waves can
really be a way of life. The story is of a couple who attribute their happiness
in life and in love to their motto: “How about that?!” This is a motto they
use whenever the “stuff” hits the fan…when life happens. Their basement
floods. “How about that?!” They get lost on the way to an appointment.

“How about that?!” Someone gets sick. “How about that?!” (Burnside
2014).
Now, I am sure these lovebirds get cranky and irritable at times, but
they have committed themselves to moving with, rather than against, the
flow of life. Their willingness to anchor themselves with this motto is good
for each of them individually—it’s a great stress reducer. And it’s good for
them as a couple. It reduces blame and defensiveness (“We don’t have to
figure out who made us get lost”) while increasing a sense of teamwork
(“What are we going to do about this flooded basement?”).

Love Is Alive
Love is alive. Love is ever-changing. Love ebbs and flows. In a recent
therapy session, an unhappy wife said to her husband, “We aren’t the same
as we used to be. Why can’t it be like it was when we were first married?”
Her tone was critical, and her attitude was passive. It’s hard to imagine our
“How about that?!” couple saying the same, isn’t it? They might say, “We
aren’t the same as we used to be. How about that?!” and go on to explore
together how love changes and how those changes must be met with gentle
curiosity and a healthy dose of humor. How unfair it is to expect an intimate
relationship, an unfolding love story, to stay the way it was. Love changes
over time—day to day, month to month, and year to year. Holding love to a
standard that reflects the past or the future is surely a recipe for
disappointment.
Staying open to life’s unfolding in general and love’s unfolding in
particular requires that we trust ourselves, that we rely on our resilience,
and that we stand up again when we fall down. Several years ago a student
of mine introduced me to a metaphor that really captures our journey with
love. The metaphor is of kintsugi, which is a Japanese ceramics technique.
In kintsugi, the artist takes a broken ceramic object and reassembles it,
holding the pieces together with resin mixed with gold, silver, or platinum.
The cracks are not to be hidden but instead made beautiful. Like ceramics
restored through kintsugi, each of us can experience priceless growth from
disappointment and heartbreak, and isn’t that what riding the waves is all
about? Love will never be easy or pain-free, but we can trust that there is
strength and beauty—even in and especially in—all the broken places.

Steps Toward Loving Bravely
Fighting against change—holding tight to our expectations as life unfolds in a
different direction—keeps us from loving bravely and deeply.

The Serenity Prayer
It is likely that you have come across the
Serenity Prayer at some point in your
life, but have you meditated on it? When
we are willing to embody the words of
the Serenity Prayer, commonly
attributed to Reinhold Niebuhr and
adapted by AA, we open ourselves up
for connection by agreeing to meet life
on life’s terms. Aspiring to know when
to advocate for change and when to let
go is vital in an intimate relationship.
We will never do it perfectly, and that is
not the goal. Here are the words:

Grant me the serenity to accept the things
I cannot change,The courage to change
the things I can,And the wisdom to know
the difference.

Sit quietly, reflect on these words, and
notice what comes up for you.

• In which areas of your life are you most
wise—able to discern the changeable
from the unchangeable?

• In which areas of your life is it
especially difficult to know when to push
and when to let go?
• Are there certain relationships in which
you are better able to embody the
Serenity Prayer and others in which it is
harder for you?

Takeaways
You did it! You have reached the last
exercise of the last lesson of this book.
Congratulations. It’s quite an
accomplishment. This book is a deep
dive with no easy answers and no
shortcuts. These exercises have given
you an opportunity to grow your
relational self-awareness. It is likely that
you have connected dots in ways you
had not done before, had conversations
you had not had before, and
experimented with practices that are
new to your life.
To consolidate your learning, look back
over the journal entries you’ve written
and highlight what really stood out for
you. Write yourself a top-ten list of “aha
moments”—insights, connections, or
learnings—that you are taking away
from this journey into yourself. Post

your “ahas” somewhere so you can
make reference to them.

Conclusion

Before I began writing this book, I knew exactly how I wanted to end it—
with my favorite poem. I read this poem each year on the last day of class,
and I read it at my brother and sister-in-law’s wedding. Written by Oriah
Mountain Dreamer (1995), “The Invitation” captures the very essence of an
intimate relationship. This poem is a reminder that love is far from neat and
tidy; love is an invitation to brave and messy authenticity. In order to
respond to the sacred invitation to love and be loved, we must first extend
that invitation to ourselves. We must know, understand, and love ourselves
with such devotion and ferocity that the love of another serves as an
extension, a mirror, and a validation of that love. That is the love that I wish
for you, my dear reader.
The Invitation
It doesn’t interest me
what you do for a living.
I want to know
what you ache for
and if you dare to dream
of meeting your heart’s longing.
It doesn’t interest me
how old you are.
I want to know
if you will risk
looking like a fool
for love
for your dream
for the adventure of being alive.
It doesn’t interest me
what planets are

squaring your moon…
I want to know
if you have touched
the centre of your own sorrow
if you have been opened
by life’s betrayals
or have become shriveled and closed
from fear of further pain.
I want to know
if you can sit with pain
mine or your own
without moving to hide it
or fade it
or fix it.
I want to know
if you can be with joy
mine or your own
if you can dance with wildness
and let the ecstasy fill you
to the tips of your fingers and toes
without cautioning us
to be careful
to be realistic
to remember the limitations
of being human.
It doesn’t interest me
if the story you are telling me
is true.
I want to know if you can
disappoint another

to be true to yourself.
If you can bear
the accusation of betrayal
and not betray your own soul.
If you can be faithless
and therefore trustworthy.
I want to know if you can see Beauty
even when it is not pretty
every day.
And if you can source your own life
from its presence.
I want to know
if you can live with failure
yours and mine
and still stand at the edge of the lake
and shout to the silver of the full moon,
“Yes.”
It doesn’t interest me
to know where you live
or how much money you have.
I want to know if you can get up
after the night of grief and despair
weary and bruised to the bone
and do what needs to be done
to feed the children.
It doesn’t interest me
who you know
or how you came to be here.
I want to know if you will stand
in the centre of the fire

with me
and not shrink back.
It doesn’t interest me
where or what or with whom
you have studied.
I want to know
what sustains you
from the inside
when all else falls away.
I want to know
if you can be alone
with yourself
and if you truly like
the company you keep
in the empty moments.

Acknowledgments

I am truly grateful to have had the opportunity to write this book. This
book is about the sacred and precious nature of relationships, and I am
aware that without my tribe, this book would never have happened.
I want to acknowledge my agent, Jill Marsal, at Marsal Lyon Literary
Agency, who responds to e-mails usually before I have hit send and whose
advice is sage and kind. Thank you to my publicist, Dana Kaye, at Kaye
Publicity, for all of your hard work and optimism. My editors Melissa Kirk,
Melissa Valentine, Clancy Drake, Marisa Solís, and Erin Raber challenged
me to grow as a writer while remaining enthusiastic. Thank you also to the
whole team at New Harbinger Publications. Leslie Basa, Stephanie Gray,
Neil Venketramen, and Dan Rosenberg, thank you for your wisdom and
guidance. Bonnie Lessing, you are a steady and graceful presence in my
world. Thank you, Jamilli Alpuche, for everything you do to keep our
family afloat.
I never would have completed this project without my amazing team of
graduate assistants: Monique Brown, Danielle Carlson, Tom Kennedy, and
Rachel Zar. Monique, you have been a champion of this project since day
one. Rachel, you are a gifted editor. Danielle, you ask brilliant questions
that push my thinking. Tom, your thoughtfulness and work ethic have been
invaluable. The four of you kept me on track and inspired for many months.
I have loved sharing every step of this process with you.
I am blessed with the most amazing friends anybody could ask for—
friends who accept me as I am while challenging me to grow. Zulus (Ali,
Julee, and Lynn), we have been studying love in our very own four-girl love
lab since we were in elementary school, sharing with each other first
crushes, first kisses, heartbreaks, wedding days, births, and every moment
in between. What I have learned from us is on every page of this book. Ali,
you are truly my soul sister—in writing and in life. Julee, you ground me
and inspire me—“The book is real.” Lynnie, you believe in me even when I
do not. I am also blessed with the support of my ’hood girls, my swole
sister, Lisa, and #Glennfit. Finally, my sweet Soul Circle (Kim, Eve, Karen,

Kathy, Julie, Julia, Becca, and Rebecca), you honored my “empowered
woman” and comforted my “little girl” every step of the way.
Thank you, Mona Fishbane, for being endlessly generous with your
wisdom and your love, and thank you for the gift of your foreword. I want
to acknowledge my home away from home, the Family Institute at
Northwestern University, for providing me with my intellectual foundation
and for supporting my ambition. Thank you, Jana Jones, Cheryl Rampage,
Doug Breunlin, Nancy Burgoyne, and Anthony Chambers, for your
encouragement. Thank you, Bill Pinsof and Art Nielsen, for giving life to
the “Marriage 101” course that I love so dearly. I am endlessly grateful to
my students, graduate and undergraduate, who bring their full selves to my
classroom and allow me to bring mine. Your questions, challenges, stories,
and journeys inspire me. Thank you to my therapy clients who invite me
into their innermost rooms and show me what loving bravely is all about.
The love lessons I learned from the family I grew up in are in the pages
of this book, so I want to thank them for being with me on this journey:
Christine, Fred John, Gerry Jr., Matt, Johanna, Addison, Connor, Ian,
Reese, Gretchen, Maddie, and Molly. My mother’s love of books and her
infinite belief in me certainly inspired me to dare greatly, and the sweet
spirit of my father, Gerry, has been a comfort to me during this process.
When I made the best decision of my life, marrying Todd Solomon, I
inherited his amazing family, whom I love dearly: Ellen, Ken, David,
Tanya, Matt, Mollie, Michael, Bonni, Mimi, and Jake. Thank you for
always making me laugh, Team Solomon.
And, most important, I want to thank my family. Todd, you are my rock
and my true north. I would never have had the courage to tackle this book
without your support and your love. I am blessed beyond measure. This
book never would have happened without your willingness to give me long
stretches of uninterrupted writing time by taking our children overnight to a
whole host of random local suburban hotels. Our marriage is my home.
Brian and Courtney, when I told you I was going to write a book, the first
thing each of you asked (in separate conversations) was, “Will it mean we
have less time with you?” Your love for me means everything. I am so
grateful for the interest you have shown—your offers to edit, draw the
cover, even publish it show what caring souls you are. I am grateful for
your patience and forgiveness for all the ways, big and small, that this book

has been part of our family. Thank you to the littlest member of our family,
Sawyer the schnoodle, who has been my faithful and sleepy writing
companion.

Appendix 1

Trauma

This appendix is for readers who need to weave one or more traumatic
chapters into the story of their lives in order to move forward and love
bravely.

Psychological trauma is an emotional response to a terrible event. There
are two main types of traumatic events: one-time traumas and enduring
traumas. One-time traumas include surviving a terrible incident, like a
crime (being sexually assaulted, robbed, or otherwise attacked) or a natural
disaster (tornado, hurricane, or flood). Enduring traumas involve an
ongoing relationship and include surviving emotional, physical, or sexual
abuse; domestic violence; neglect; kidnapping; bullying; or even growing
up in a family dealing with addiction. Traumatic events are those in which
someone is exposed to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual
violation. Traumatic events can leave a variety of scars. Initially following
the event, people may suffer from shock or denial. Over the long term,
people may experience unpredictable emotions, flashbacks, relationship
problems, and even physical symptoms like headaches and nausea. These
are signs of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
When traumas endure over many months or years—as is the case with
growing up in an abusive home or being in an abusive intimate relationship
—they can result in relationship problems, physical problems, difficulty
regulating emotions, dissociation or losing time, struggles with impulse
control, cognitive issues (such as attention problems or executive
functioning problems), and lack of self-esteem or poor self-concept.
Therapists sometimes refer to symptoms such as these as complex trauma.
People who suffer trauma early in their lives (as kids or teens) are
particularly at risk of pushing away memories and feelings about the
trauma, determined that nobody has to know and believing that it will not
affect who they are. While I respect the desire not to be defined by trauma,
what I see over and over is that, even if you think that your traumatic

memories are stuffed away, something happens to make them sneak out
sooner or later. Often that something is falling in love!
An intimate relationship requires you to become vulnerable to another
person, sharing stories of the past and hopes for the future. In that sharing,
you may begin to feel that you want your partner to know about your
trauma. Or, as your partner gets to know more and more about you, it may
feel like a glaring omission for her not to know something so significant
about you. But that urge to open up might be coupled with a fear that if
your partner were to know this about you, she couldn’t possibly still love
you.
Knowing when and how to share traumatic chapters of your story rests
upon healthy boundary management. One extreme is having diffuse
boundaries, which means you may tell someone everything about you as
soon as you start dating. Sometimes people rationalize this approach by
thinking, “I’d rather know now if you can’t handle all of me, so that I don’t
invest needless time and emotion.” The other extreme is rigid boundaries,
which means you may wait and wait, perhaps hoping the other person will
never find out. Sometimes people who take this route think, “If you were to
know this about me, you couldn’t love me.” The desire to keep the past
stuffed in the far recesses of our minds is usually motivated by shame, but
doing so also perpetuates shame. Healthy boundaries—being both
connected and protected—lie in the shades of gray between these extremes.
Sharing your story requires people, and sharing your stories builds trust
between people. Trust is essential in a healthy intimate relationship.
Trust and trauma unfortunately go hand in hand. Trauma (especially
complex trauma) involves a breach of trust in an important relationship (for
example, in the case of sexual abuse). Therefore, building an intimate,
trusting romantic relationship is, by its very nature, re-traumatizing, as the
intimate relationship ends up in some ways replicating the old traumatic
relationship. For example, some people notice that in the context of their
intimate relationship, sometimes especially during sex, they experience an
increase in flashbacks or intrusive thoughts (uninvited thoughts that pop
into your head) related to the trauma. If this happens, the best course of
action is to do some individual psychotherapy with a therapist who
specializes in trauma. Appendix 2 has information about how to find a
therapist.

A loving, trusting romantic relationship can be a powerfully healing
force in the life of someone who has suffered a trauma. This is the best-case
scenario, and it is possible. I have been moved to tears many times in
therapy when an intimate partner takes the risk of bravely sharing a painful
memory from his or her past. In those moments, courage claims victory
over shame. And there is no more powerful way to heal shame than through
the power of connection. But self-work and self-care in the form of taking
responsibility for the impact that the trauma has had on you lay the
foundation. In other words, your romantic partner cannot heal your trauma.
Love alone is not enough.

Appendix 2

How to Find a Therapist

It is brave, indeed, to decide that it’s time to start going to therapy!
Because it is emotionally taxing enough to decide it’s time to ask for help,
you at least want the task of finding a therapist to be an easy one. This
appendix is intended to make your search as seamless as possible.

Finding a Therapist
There is more than one way to get to a first session. Here are some options
for getting a referral:
Ask your primary care physician for a few names.
Talk to a friend or family member who is in therapy and find out
whether that therapist will also see you or refer you to a colleague.
Call your health insurance carrier and ask for a list of providers in
your area. You can then look on providers’ websites or call them to
learn about the services they offer.
Search online using one of the websites listed below.

Choosing a Therapist
Creating a relationship with a therapist is a big deal, and in order to benefit
from this trusting relationship, you will need to be vulnerable, honest, and
accountable. Therefore, be discerning and careful in choosing someone with
whom you can work. I suggest that you do the following:
Identify a few possible candidates and then talk to each of them
on the phone or do a first session. You and the therapist will both
need to assess how the relationship feels. Even if a therapist is

competent, there might not be great chemistry between the two of
you, so it is okay to do more than one first session. Not unlike an
intimate relationship, the way you feel about your therapist at
session one will be different than the way you will feel at session
ten, but you still will need to access your gut feelings during the first
session: How safe do you feel? How listened to do you feel? How
trusting do you feel?
Remember, you are the consumer. It is appropriate to ask specific
questions on the phone and in your initial session. Questions you
might want to ask your therapist include:
Can you tell me about your training?
How would you describe your approach to therapy?
Can you tell me about your experience working with
clients like me?
How will we create treatment goals, and how will we
monitor my progress?
Do you feel you can help me?
Talk with your therapist about the reactions that you are having
to your sessions. If you feel misunderstood or rushed, say so. If you
have a question about how your therapist is viewing you or your
situation, ask. Talking with your therapist about the relationship
between the two of you will help you in your other relationships—
including in your intimate relationship—so speak up!
If you are hiring a couples therapist, ask about his or her
training. Being a good therapist and being a good couples therapist
are quite different, so either seek therapy from someone whose
name is followed by the letters LMFT (licensed marriage and family
therapist) or ensure that that clinician has extensive training in
working with couples. The online resource list that follows includes
some websites specifically for those seeking couples therapy.

Online Resources
Here are some online resources that you can use on your quest to find a
therapist.
General Websites
Psychology Today: http://www.psychologytoday.com
Good Therapy: http://www.goodtherapy.org
Network Therapy: http://www.networktherapy.com
All Therapist: http://www.alltherapist.com
All About Counseling: http://www.allaboutconseling.com
Couples and Family Therapy
American Association
http://www.aamft.org

for

Marriage

and

Family

Therapy:

Center for Self Leadership: http://www.selfleadership.org
The International Centre for Excellence in Emotionally Focused
Therapy: http://www.iceeft.com
Imago Relationships: http://www.gettingtheloveyouwant.com
Sex Therapy
Society for Sex Therapy and Research: http://sstarnet.org/therapistdirectory.php
American Association of Sexuality Educators, Counselors and
Therapists: http://www.aasect.org/referral-directory

References
Ansari, A. 2015. Modern Romance. With E. Klinenberg. New York:
Penguin Press.
Bosman, J. 2014. “For Fifty Shades of Grey, More than 100 Million Sold.”
The New York Times. Accessed April 2016.
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/27/business/media/for-fifty-shadesof-grey-more-than-100-million-sold.html?_r=1.
Brown, B. 2015. Daring Greatly: How the Courage to Be Vulnerable
Transforms the Way We Live, Love, Parent, and Lead. New York:
Avery.
Burnside, A. 2014. From Role to Soul: 15 Shifts on the Awakening Journey.
Deadwood, OR: Wyatt-MacKenzie Publishing.
Chapman, G. 2015. The 5 Love Languages: The Secret to Love that Lasts.
Chicago: Northfield Publishing.
Coontz, S. 2006. Marriage, a History: How Love Conquered Marriage.
New York: Penguin.
Doherty, W. 2013. Take Back Your Marriage: Sticking Together in a World
That Pulls Us Apart (Second Edition). New York: Guilford Press.
Finkel, E. 2013. “The Hack to Save Your Marriage.” TEDxUChicago.
Finkel, E. J., E. B. Slotter, L. B. Luchies, G. M. Walton, and J. J. Gross.
2013. “A Brief Intervention to Promote Conflict Reappraisal Preserves
Marital Quality over Time.” Psychological Science 24(8): 1595–1601.
Fishbane, M. 2013. Loving with the Brain in Mind: Neurobiology and
Couple Therapy. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Fisher, H. 2004. Why We Love: The Nature and Chemistry of Romantic
Love. New York: Henry Holt.

Freitas, D. 2013. The End of Sex: How Hookup Culture Is Leaving a
Generation Unhappy, Sexually Unfulfilled, and Confused about
Intimacy. New York: Basic Books.
Gilbert, E. 2007. Eat, Pray, Love: One Woman’s Search for Everything
Across Italy, India, and Indonesia. New York: Riverhead Books.
Gordon, C. L., R. A. M. Arnette, and R. E. Smith. 2011. “Have You
Thanked Your Spouse Today?: Felt and Expressed Gratitude Among
Married Couples.” Personality and Individual Differences 50: 339–
343.
Gottman, J. M. 2011. The Science of Trust: Emotional Attunement for
Couples. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
hooks, b. 2001. All About Love: New Visions. New York: William Morrow
Paperbacks.
Johns, K. N., E. S. Allen, and K. C. Gordon. 2015. “The Relationship
Between Mindfulness and Forgiveness in Infidelity.” Mindfulness 6:
1462–1471.
Johnson, S. 2008. Hold Me Tight: Seven Conversations for a Lifetime of
Love. New York: Little, Brown and Company.
Johnson, S. 2013. Love Sense: The Revolutionary New Science of Romantic
Relationships. New York: Little, Brown and Company.
Kornfield, J. 2016. “Forgiveness Meditation.” Accessed April 2016.
https://jackkornfield.com/forgiveness-meditation.
Krasnow, I. 2011. The Secret Lives of Wives: Women Share What It Really
Takes to Stay Married. New York: Gotham.
———. 2016. “Seven Secrets to Staying Married.” Accessed April 2016.
http://iriskrasnow.com/_secret_lives/seven_secrets.htm.
Lawler-Row, K. A., J. C. Karremans, C. Scott, M. Edlis-Matityahou, and L.
Edwards. 2008. “Forgiveness, Physiological Reactivity and Health:

The Role of Anger.” International Journal of Psychophysiology 68:
51–58.
Lee, S. W. S., and N. Schwartz. 2014. “Framing Love: When It Hurts to
Think We Were Made for Each Other.” Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 54: 61–67.
Lesser, E. 2000. The Seeker’s Guide. New York: Villard.
———. 2005. Broken Open. New York: Villard.
Lewicki, R. J., B. Polin, and R. B. Lount Jr. 2016. “An Exploration of the
Structure of Effective Apologies.” Negotiation and Conflict
Management Research 9(2): 177–196.
Linehan, M. M. 2015. DBT Skills Training Manual: Second Edition. New
York: Guilford Press.
Lyubomirsky, S. 2013. The Myths of Happiness: What Should Make You
Happy but Doesn’t, What Shouldn’t Make You Happy but Does.
London: Penguin Books.
Malec, A. B. 2015. Marriage in Modern Life: Why It Works When It Works.
Charleston, SC: Advantage Media Group.
Markman, H. J., and S. M. Stanley. 2010. Fighting for Your Marriage: A
Deluxe Revised Edition of the Classic Best-seller for Enhancing Your
Marriage and Preventing Divorce. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
McAdams, D. 2006. “The Role of Narrative in Personality Psychology
Today.” Narrative Inquiry 16(1): 11–18.
Moore, T. 1996. Soul Mates: Honoring the Mystery of Love and
Relationship. New York: Harper Perennial.
Myss, C. 1997. Why People Don’t Heal and How They Can. New York:
Harmony.

Neff, K. D. 2012. “The Science of Self-Compassion.” In Compassion and
Wisdom: 79–92, edited by Alan S. Gurman and R. Siegel. New York:
Guilford Press.
Neff, K. 2011. Self-Compassion: The Proven Power of Being Kind to
Yourself. New York: HarperCollins.
Nhat Hanh, Thich. 2011. Fidelity: How to Create a Loving Relationship
That Lasts. Berkeley, CA: Parallax Press.
Oriah. 1999. The Invitation. San Francisco: HarperONE.
Parker-Pope, T. 2007. “Is It Love or Mental Illness? They’re Closer Than
You Think.” Wall Street Journal, February 13.
Perel, E. 2007. Mating in Captivity: Unlocking Erotic Intelligence. New
York: Harper Perennial.
Perel, E. 2015. “Why Happy Couples Cheat.” TED Talk.
Pew Research Center. 2010. The Decline of Marriage and the Rise of New
Families. Washington, D.C.: Pew Research Center, Social and
Demographic Trends.
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/files/2010/11/pew-social-trends-2010families.pdf.
Pinsof, W. M. 1995. Integrative Problem-Centered Therapy: A Synthesis of
Family, Individual, and Biological Therapies. New York: Basic Books.
Pinsof, W. M., D. C. Breunlin, A. L. Chambers, A. H. Solomon, and W. P.
Russell. 2015. “Integrative Problem-Centered Metaframeworks
Approach.” In Clinical Handbook of Couple Therapy: Fifth Edition,
edited by Alan S. Gurman, Jay L. Lebow, and Douglas K. Snyder.
New York: Guilford Press.
Przybylski, A. K., and N. Weinstein. 2012. “Can You Connect with Me
Now? How the Presence of Mobile Communication Technology

Influences Face-to-Face Conversation Quality.” Journal of Social and
Personal Relationships 30(3): 237–246.
Real, T. 1998. I Don’t Want to Talk About It: Overcoming the Secret Legacy
of Male Depression. New York: Scribner.
Rock, D., and D. Siegel. 2011. “The Healthy Mind Platter.” Accessed April
2016. http://healthymindplatter.com.
Schwartz, B. 2004. The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less. New York:
HarperCollins.
Sheinkman, M., and M. Fishbane. 2004. “The Vulnerability Cycle: Working
with Impasses in Couple Therapy.” Family Process 43(3): 279–299.
Siegel, D. J. 2010. Mindsight: The New Science of Personal
Transformation. New York: Bantam Books.
Siegel, D. J., and M. Hartzel. 2013. Parenting from the Inside Out 10thAnniversary Edition: How a Deeper Self-Understanding Can Help You
Raise Children Who Thrive. New York: TarcherPerigee.
Sollee, D. 2016. “Marriage Quotes.” Accessed April 2016.
http://www.smartmarriages.com/marriage.quotes.html.
Solomon, A. 2016. “Inside Hookup Culture: Are We Having Fun Yet?”
Psychotherapy Networker January–February.
Solomon, A. H. 2001. Stories of Us: A Qualitative Analysis of Sex
Differences in the Relationship Narratives of Recently Married Women
and Men. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL.
Turkle, S. 2015. Reclaiming Conversation: The Power of Talk in a Digital
Age. New York: Penguin Publishing Group.
Whisman, M., A. E. Dixon, and B. Johnson. 1997. “Therapists’
Perspectives of Couple Problems and Treatment Issues in Couple
Therapy.” Journal of Family Psychology 11: 361–366.

Wilder, T. 1942. The Skin of Our Teeth. New York: Harper & Brothers.
Wile, D. 2002. “Collaborative Couple Therapy.” In Clinical Handbook of
Couple Therapy: Third Edition, edited by Alan S. Gurman and Neil S.
Jacobson. New York: Guilford Press.
Wood, A. M., J. J. Froh, and A. W. A. Geraghty. 2010. “Gratitude and WellBeing: A Review and Theoretical Integration.” Clinical Psychology
Review 30: 890–905.
Alexandra H. Solomon, PhD, is staff clinical psychologist, member of the
teaching faculty in the marriage and family therapy graduate program, and
clinical assistant professor of psychology at The Family Institute at
Northwestern University. In addition to her clinical work with couples and
individuals, Solomon teaches graduate and undergraduate students. One of
her courses is Northwestern University’s internationally renowned
“Building Loving and Lasting Relationships: Marriage 101,” which
combines traditional and experiential learning to educate students about key
relational issues like intimacy, sex, conflict, acceptance, and forgiveness.
Solomon’s work has been widely cited, and her articles on love and
marriage have appeared in The Handbook of Clinical Psychology, The
Handbook of Couple Therapy, Family Process, Psychotherapy Networker,
and other top publications in psychology. Her work also appears in O
Magazine and The Huffington Post, and she is a frequent interviewee and
contributor for the Oprah Winfrey Network, Yahoo! Health, The Atlantic,
CBS Early Show, NPR, Psychology Today, and WGN Morning News. She
is a sought-after speaker for corporate, collegiate, and professional
audiences on topics related to modern love. Solomon lives in Highland
Park, IL, with her husband, Todd, and their two children, Brian and
Courtney.
Sign up for monthly articles and relationship advice from Alexandra at
www.bit.do/lovingbravely, and learn more about her work at
www.dralexandrasolomon.com.
Foreword writer, Mona D. Fishbane, PhD, is director of couple therapy
training at the Chicago Center for Family Health, and a clinical
psychologist in private practice. She is an AAMFT-approved supervisor, a
member of the advisory board for the journal Family Process, and a long-

term AFTA member, where she has served on the board. Fishbane lectures
nationally and internationally, and has published numerous articles on
couples therapy and neurobiology, as well as on intergenerational
relationships. She has been the recipient of honors and fellowships, most
recently a grant from the John Templeton Foundation. Fishbane’s book,
Loving with the Brain in Mind, is part of the Norton Series on interpersonal
neurobiology. Find out more at www.monafishbane.com.

Table of Contents
1. Endorsements
2. Title Page
3. Copyright
4. Dedication
5. Contents
6. Foreword vii
7. Introduction: The Love Classroom 1
8. Part 1: Self-Reflection
1. Lesson 1. Understand Your Past 12
2. Lesson 2. Craft Your Story 20
3. Lesson 3. Awaken to Your Life Today 29
4. Lesson 4. Forge a New Connection 38
5. Lesson 5. Establish Healthy Boundaries 48
9. Part 2: Self-Awareness
1. Lesson 6. Embrace Your Unique Love Truths 62
2. Lesson 7. Surrender the Fairy Tale 72
3. Lesson 8. Keep the Soul in Soulmate 82
4. Lesson 9. Listen to Your Gut 89
5. Lesson 10. Source Your Life 97
10. Part 3: Self-Expression
1. Lesson 11. Inhabit Your Body 108
2. Lesson 12. Honor the Space Between 124
3. Lesson 13. Respect the Pause 134
4. Lesson 14. Dig a Little Deeper 147
5. Lesson 15. Build the Cushion 157
11. Part 4: Self-Expansion
1. Lesson 16. Practice a Loving “I’m Sorry” 170
2. Lesson 17. Forgive…Again and Again 180
3. Lesson 18. Value Presence 189
4. Lesson 19. Be on Your Own Team 200
5. Lesson 20. Ride the Waves 207
12. Conclusion 214
13. Acknowledgments 219

14. Appendix 1: Trauma 222
15. Appendix 2: How to Find a Therapist 225
16. References 228

Guide
Contents
i
ii
iii
iv
v
vii
viii
ix
x
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57

58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94

95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131

132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168

169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
205

206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213
214
215
216
217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233
234

