© 2018 Thibaut Meurisse
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced in any form without
permission from the publisher, except as permitted by U.S. copyright law.

CONTENTS

Why This Book
Introduction
How to use this book
I.

II.

What Emotions Are
1.

How your survival mechanism affects your emotions

2.

What Is the Ego

3.

The Nature of Emotions

What Impacts Your Emotions
4.

The impact of sleep on your mood

5.

Using your body to influence your emotions

6.

Using your thoughts to influence your emotions

7.

Using your words to influence your emotions

8.

How your breathing affects your emotions

9.

How your environment affects your emotions

10. How music affects your emotions

III. How to change your emotions

11. How emotions are formed
12. Changing your interpretation
13. Letting go of your emotions
14. Conditioning your mind to experience more positive emotions
15. Changing your emotions by changing your behavior
16. Changing your emotions by changing your environment

Short-term and long-term solutions to deal with negative
17. emotions
IV. How to use your emotions to grow

18. How emotions can guide you in the right direction
19. Recording your emotions
20. Not being good enough
21. Being defensive
22. Stress and worry
23. Caring what people think of you
24. Resentment
25. Jealousy
26. Depression
27. Fear/Discomfort
28. Procrastination
29. Lack of motivation
Conclusion
About the Author
Bibliography

WHY THIS BOOK

Many books discuss emotions and how they affect your life, but they
rarely provide a comprehensive view of what emotions are, where
they come from, what is their role, or how they affect your life.
Emotions are among the trickiest things to deal with and,
unfortunately, too often you and I will fall prey to their mystical power.
We find ourselves unable to break their spell. Because they affect
every aspect of our lives and determine the quality of it, our inability
to understand how emotions work can prevent us from designing our
ideal life and from fulfilling our potential.
By the end of this book, you will know how emotions work and, more
importantly, you will be better equipped to deal with them.
If you struggle to deal with negative emotions, or want to learn how
emotions work and how you can use them as a tool for your personal
growth, this book is for you.

INTRODUCTION

The mind in its own place, and in itself can make a heaven
of Hell, a hell of Heaven.
—J

M

,

.

We all experience a wild range of emotions throughout our lives. I
had to admit, while writing this book, I experienced highs and lows
myself. At first, I was filled with excitement and thrilled at the idea of
providing people with a guide to help them understand their
emotions. I imagined how readers’ lives would improve as they
learned to control their emotions. My motivation was high and I
couldn’t help but imagine how great the book would be.
Or so I thought.
After the initial excitement, the time came to sit down to write the
actual book, and that’s when the excitement wore off pretty quickly.
Ideas that looked great in my mind suddenly felt dull. My writing
seemed boring, and I felt as though I had nothing substantive or
valuable to contribute.
Sitting at my desk and writing became more challenging each day. I
started losing confidence. Who was I to write a book about emotions
if I couldn’t even master my own emotions? How ironic! I considered

giving up. There are already plenty of books on the topic, so why add
one more?
At the same time, I realized this book was a perfect opportunity to
work on my own emotional issues. And who doesn’t suffer from
negative emotions from time to time? We all have highs and lows,
don’t we? The key is what we do with our lows. Are we using our
emotions to grow? Are we learning something from them? Or are we
beating ourselves up over them?
So, let’s talk about your emotions now. Let me start by asking you
this:
How do you feel right now?
Knowing how you feel is the first step toward taking control of your
emotions. You may have spent so much time internalizing you’ve lost
touch with your emotions. Perhaps you answered as follows: “I feel
this book could be useful,” or “I really feel I could learn something
from this book.” However, none of these answers reflect how you
feel. You don’t ‘feel like this,’ or ‘feel like that,’ you simply ‘feel.’ You
don’t ‘feel like’ this book could be useful, you ‘think’ this book could
be useful, and that generates an emotion which makes you ‘feel’
excited about reading it. Feelings manifest as physical sensations in
your body, not as an idea in your mind. Perhaps, the reason the
word ‘feel’ is so often overused or misused is because we don’t want
to talk about our emotions. So, how do you feel now?
Why is it important to talk about emotions?
How you feel determines the quality of your life. Your emotions can
make your life miserable or truly magical. That’s why they are among
the most important things to focus on. Your emotions color all your
experiences. When you feel good, everything seems, feels, or tastes
better. You also think better thoughts. Your energy levels are higher
and possibilities seem limitless. Conversely, when you feel
depressed, everything seems dull. You have little energy and you

become unmotivated. You feel stuck in a place (mentally and
physically) you don’t want to be, and the future looks gloomy.
Your emotions can also act as a powerful guide. They can tell you
something is wrong and allow you to make changes in your life. As
such, they may be among the most powerful personal growth tools
you have.
Sadly, neither your teachers nor your parents taught you how
emotions work or how to control them. I find it ironic that just about
anything comes with a how-to manual, while your mind doesn’t.
You’ve never received an instruction manual to teach you how your
mind works and how to use it to better manage your emotions, have
you? I haven’t. In fact, until now, I doubt one even existed.
What you’ll learn in this book
This book is the how-to manual your parents should have given you
at birth. It’s the instruction manual you should have received at
school. In it, I’ll share everything you need to know about emotions
so you can overcome your fears and limitations and become the type
of person you really want to be.
You’ll learn what emotions are, how they are formed, and how you
can use them for your personal growth. You’ll also learn how to deal
with negative emotions and condition your mind to create more
positive emotions.
It is my sincere hope and expectation that, by the end of this book,
you will have a clear understanding of what emotions are and will
have all the tools you need to start taking control of them.
More specifically, this book will help you:
Understand what emotions are and how they impact your life
Identify negative emotions that control your life and learn to
overcome them

Change your story to take better control over your life and
create a more compelling future, and
Reprogram your mind to experience more positive emotions.
Here is a more detailed summary of what you’ll learn in this book:
In Part I , we’ll discuss what emotions are. You’ll learn why you are
wired to focus on negativity and what you can do to counter this
effect. You’ll also discover how your beliefs impinge upon your
emotions. Finally, you’ll learn how negative emotions work and why
they are so tricky.
In Part II , we’ll go over the things that directly impact your
emotions. You’ll understand the roles your body, your thoughts, your
words, or your sleep, play in your life and how you can use them to
change your emotions.
In Part III , you’ll learn how emotions are formed. You’ll also learn
how to condition your mind to experience more positive emotions.
And finally, in Part IV , we’ll discuss how to use your emotions as a
tool for personal growth. You’ll learn why you experience emotions
such as fear or depression and how they work. You’ll then discover
how to use them to grow.
Let’s get started.

HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

I encourage you to read all the way through this book at least once.
After that, I invite you to revisit the book and focus on the section(s)
you want to explore in more depth.
In this book, I include a number of different exercises. Though I don’t
expect you to go through them all, my hope is you’ll pick some and
apply them in your life. Remember, the results you’ll get out of this
book depend on how much time and effort you’re willing to put in.
If you feel this book could be of any use to your family members or
friends, make sure to share it with them. Emotions are complex and I
believe it would benefit us all to deepen our understanding of the
topic.

PART I

WHAT EMOTIONS ARE

Have you ever wondered what emotions are and what purpose they
serve?
In this section, we’ll discuss how your survival mechanism affects
your emotions. Then, we’ll explain what the ‘ego’ is and how it
impacts your emotions. Finally, we’ll discover the mechanism behind
emotions and learn why negative emotions can be so hard to deal
with.

1

HOW YOUR SURVIVAL MECHANISM AFFECTS YOUR
EMOTIONS

Why people have a bias towards negativity
Your brain is designed for survival, which explains why you’re able to
read this book at this very moment. When you think about it, the
probability of you being born was extremely low. For this miracle to
happen, all the generations before you had to survive long enough to
procreate. In their quest for survival and procreation, they must have
faced death hundreds or perhaps thousands of times.
Fortunately, unlike your ancestors, you’re (probably) not facing death
every day. In fact, in many parts of the world, life has never been
safer. Yet, your survival mechanism hasn’t changed much. Your
brain still scans your environment looking for potential threats.
In many ways, some parts of your brain have become obsolete.
While you may not be seconds away from being eaten by a predator,
your brain still gives significantly more weight to negative events
than to positive ones.
Fear of rejection is one example of a bias toward negativity. In the
past, being rejected from your tribe would reduce your chances of
survival significantly. Therefore, you learned to look for any sign of
rejection, and this became hardwired in your brain.
Nowadays, being rejected often carries little or no consequence to
your long-term survival. You could be hated by the entire world and

still have a job, a roof and plenty of food on the table, yet, your brain
is still programmed to perceive rejection as a threat to your survival.
This is why rejection can be so painful. While you know most
rejections are no big deal, you nevertheless feel the emotional pain.
If you listen to your mind, you may even create a whole drama
around it. You may believe you aren’t worthy of love and dwell on a
rejection for days or weeks. Worse still, you may become depressed
as a result of this rejection.
In fact, one single criticism can often outweigh hundreds of positive
ones. That’s why, an author with fifty 5-star reviews, is likely to feel
terrible when they receive a single 1-star review. While the author
understands the 1-star review isn’t a threat to her survival, her
authorial brain doesn’t. It likely interprets the negative review as a
threat to her ego which triggers an emotional reaction.
The fear of rejection can also lead you to over-dramatize events. If
your boss criticized you at work, your brain may see the event as a
threat and you now think, “What if I’m fired? What if I can’t find a job
quickly enough and my wife leaves me? What about my kids? What
if I can’t see them again?” While you are fortunate to have such an
effective survival mechanism, it is also your responsibility to separate
real threats from imaginary ones. If you don’t, you’ll experience
unnecessary pain and worry that will negatively impact the quality of
your life. To overcome this bias towards negativity, you must
reprogram your mind. One of a human being’s greatest powers is
our ability to use our thoughts to shape our reality and interpret
events in a more empowering way. This book will teach you how to
do this.

Action Step
Complete the corresponding exercise in the workbook (Section I.
What Emotions are - 1. Bias towards negativity ).

Why your brain’s job isn’t to make you happy
Your brain’s primary job is not to make you happy, but to ensure your
survival. Thus, if you want to be happy, you must take control of your
emotions rather than hoping you’ll be happy because it’s your natural
state. In the following section, we’ll discuss what happiness is and
how it works.
How dopamine can mess with your happiness
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which, among other functions, plays
a major role in rewarding certain behaviors. When dopamine is
released into specific areas of your brain—the pleasure centers—
you get a high. This is what happens during exercise, when you
gamble, have sex, or eat great food.
One of the roles of dopamine is to ensure you look for food so you
don't die of starvation, and you search for a mate so you can
reproduce. Without dopamine, our species would likely be extinct by
now. It’s a pretty good thing, right?
Well, yes and no. In today’s world, this reward system is, in many
cases, obsolete. While in the past, dopamine was linked to our
survival instinct, the release of dopamine can now be generated
artificially. A great example of this effect is social media, which uses
psychology to suck as much time as possible out of your life. Have
you noticed all these notifications that pop up constantly? They’re
used to trigger a release of dopamine so you stay connected, and
the longer you stay connected, the more money the services make.
Watching pornography or gambling also leads to a release of
dopamine which can make these activities highly addictive.
Fortunately, we don’t need to act each time our brain releases
dopamine. For instance, we don’t need to constantly check our
Facebook newsfeeds just because it gives us a pleasurable shot of
dopamine.

Today’s society is selling a version of happiness that can make us un
happy. We’ve become addicted to dopamine largely because of
marketers who have found effective ways to exploit our brains. We
receive multiple shots of dopamine throughout the day and we love
it. But is that the same thing as happiness?
Worse than that, dopamine can create real addictions with severe
consequences on our health. Research conducted at Tulane
University showed that, when given permission to self-stimulate their
pleasure center, participants did it an average of forty times per
minute. They chose the stimulation of their pleasure center over
food, even refusing to eat when hungry!
Korean, Lee Seung Seop is an extreme case of this syndrome. In
2005, Mr Seop died after playing a video game for fifty-eight hours
straight with very little food or water, and no sleep. The subsequent
investigation concluded the cause of death was heart failure induced
by exhaustion and dehydration. He was only twenty-eight years old.
To take control of your emotions, it is essential you understand the
role dopamine plays and how it affects your happiness. Are you
addicted to your phone? Are you glued to your TV? Or maybe you
spend too much time playing video games. Most of us are addicted
to something. For some people it’s obvious, but for others, it’s more
subtle. For instance, you could be addicted to thinking. To better
control your emotions, it is important to shed the light on your
addictions as they can rob you of your happiness.
The ‘one day I will’ myth
Do you believe that one day you will achieve your dream and finally
be happy? This is unlikely to happen. You may (and I hope you will)
achieve your dream, but you won’t live ‘happily ever after.’ This is
just another trick your mind plays on you.
Your mind quickly acclimates to new situations, which is probably the
result of evolution and our need to adapt continually in order to
survive and reproduce. This is also probably why the new car or
house you want will only make you happy for a while. Once the initial

excitement wears off, you’ll move on to crave the next exciting thing.
This phenomenon is known as ‘hedonic adaptation.’
How hedonic adaptation works
Let me share an interesting study that will likely change the way you
see happiness. This study, which was conducted on lottery winners
and paraplegics, was extremely eye-opening for me. Conducted in
1978, the investigation evaluated how winning the lottery or
becoming a paraplegic influence happiness:
The study found that one year after the event, both groups were just
as happy as they were beforehand. Yes, just as happy (or unhappy).
You can find more about it by watching Dan Gilbert’s Ted Talk, The
Surprising Science of Happiness here .
Perhaps you believe that you’ll be happy once you’ve ‘made it.’ But,
as the above study on happiness shows, this is simply not true. No
matter what happens to you, you’ll revert back to your predetermined
level of happiness once you’ve adapted to the new event. This is
how your mind works.
Does that mean you can’t be happier than you are right now? No.
What it means is that, in the long run, external events have very little
impact on your level of happiness.
In fact, according to Sonja Lyubomirsky, author of The How of
Happiness , fifty percent of our happiness is determined by genetics,
forty percent by internal factors, and only ten percent by external
factors. These external factors include such things as whether we’re
single or married, rich or poor, and similar social influences.
This suggests, only ten percent of your happiness is linked to
external factors, which is probably way less than you thought. The
bottom line is this: Your attitude towards life influences your
happiness, not what happens to you.
By now, you understand how your survival mechanism impacts
negatively your emotions and prevent you from experiencing more

joy and happiness in your life. In the next section, we’ll learn about
the ego.

Action step
Use the workbook to write down things that give you ‘shots of
dopamine’ (Section I. What Emotions are - 2. Happiness )

2

WHAT IS THE EGO

Your survival mechanism is not the only factor affecting your
emotions. Your ego also plays a major role in shaping the way you
feel. Thus, to gain more control over your emotions, it is fundamental
you understand what your ego is and how it works.
Now, let’s clarify what we mean by ego. We often say of someone he
has a “big ego” referring to the ego as something close to pride.
While pride is certainly a manifestation of ego, that’s only one part of
it. You may show no pride and appear humble while still being
controlled by your ego.
So, what is the ego?
The ego refers to the self-identity you’ve constructed throughout your
life. How was this identity created? Put simply, the ego was created
through your thoughts and, as a mind-created identity, has no
concrete reality.
Events that happen to you bear no meaning in themselves. You give
them meaning only through your interpretation of those events.
Additionally, you accept things about yourself because people told
you to do so. What’s more, you identify with your name, your age,
your religion, your political belief, or your occupation in a similar way.
This attachment has consequences. As we’ll see later in this book,
attachment creates beliefs, and these beliefs lead you to experience

certain emotions. For instance, you may become offended when
people criticize your religion or attack your political principles.
Note that throughout this book, we’ll refer to the ego as your ‘story’
or your ‘identity’ using these words interchangeably.
Are you aware of your ego?
Your understanding of the way your ego works depends on your
level of self-awareness. People at the lowest level of consciousness
are not even aware the ego exists and, as a result, are enslaved by
it.
On the other hand, highly self-conscious people can see through
their ego. They understand how belief works and how excessive
attachment to a set of beliefs can create suffering in their life. In
effect, these individuals become the master of their mind and are at
peace with themselves.
Note that the ego is neither good nor bad, it’s just a result of a lack of
self-awareness. It fades away as you become aware of it, since ego
and awareness cannot coexist.
Your ego’s need for an identity
Your ego is a selfish entity, only concerned about its own survival.
Interestingly, it’s rather similar to your brain in the way it operates. It
has its own survival mechanism and will do whatever it can to
persist. As with your brain, its primary concern is neither your
happiness nor your peace of mind. On the contrary, your ego is
restless. It wants you to be a go-getter. It wants you to do, have and
achieve great things so you can become a ‘somebody.’
As we already mentioned, your ego needs an identity to exist. The
way it does that is through identification with things, people, or
beliefs and ideas.
Now, let’s look at some of the things your ego identifies with to
strengthen its identity:

Physical items
The ego likes to identify with physical things. Needless to say, it
thrives in today’s world. Perhaps, we can say capitalism and the
consumer society we’re living in today is the creation of collective
egos, which is why it has been the dominant economic model in the
recent decades.
Marketers perfectly understand people’s need to identify with things.
They know people don’t just buy a product, they also buy the
emotions or story attached to the product. Often, you buy certain
clothes or a particular car because you want to tell a story about
yourself. For instance, you may want to enhance your status, look
cool or express your unique personality, and choose the products
most closely associated with these ideals.
This is how the ego works. It uses things to create a story you can
identify with. It doesn’t mean things are wrong per se . It’s a negative
issue only when you become overly attached to things, believing
they can fulfill you—which they can’t.
Your body
Most people derive their self-worth from their physical appearance.
Your ego loves the way you look because it is the easiest thing to
recognize and quantify. When you strongly associate with your
physical appearance, you tend to identify more easily with physical
and emotional pain. Believe it or not, you can observe your body
without ‘identifying with’ it.
Friends/acquaintances
The ego also derives its sense of identity from your relationships with
others. The ego is only interested in what it can get from others. In
other words, the ego thrives on the way it can use people to
strengthen its identity.
If you are honest with yourself, you’ll realize most of the things you
do are attempts to obtain the approval of others. You want your

parents to be proud of you, your boss to respect you, and your wife
to love you.
Now, let’s see in more detail how the ego works in the following
cases:
Parent/child relationships
Some parents’ egos lead to the creation of a strong sense of
attachment and identification with their children. This is based on the
false belief their children are their ‘possessions.’ As a result, they try
to control their childrens’ lives and ‘use’ them to live the life they
wanted to live when they were younger—this is called living
vicariously through your children. You see this all the time. Next time
you watch a junior soccer (or baseball) game, watch the parents on
the touchline to see how some react. Try spotting the parents living
vicariously—they are the ones screaming the loudest, and not simply
in encouragement. This may happen largely unconsciously.
Couples
The feeling of needing someone is very much a play of the ego as
well. Anthony de Mello has a beautiful way to put it when he says:
Loneliness is not cured by human company. Loneliness is
cured by contact with reality, by understanding that we don’t
need people.
—A

M

Once you realize you don’t actually need anyone, you can start
enjoying people’s company. You can see them as they really are
rather than trying to get something from them.
Your beliefs
Your ego also uses beliefs to strengthen its identity. In extreme
cases, people become so attached to their beliefs they are ready to

die to protect them. Worse still, they are willing to kill people who
disagree with them. Religion is a perfect illustration of the dangers of
excessive attachment to beliefs. The ego will use any belief to
strengthen its identity, whether these beliefs are religious, political, or
metaphysical.
Other objects of identification
Now let’s have a look at a (non-exhaustive) list of things your ego
generally derives its identity from:
Your body
Your name
Your gender
Your nationality
Your culture
Your family/friends
Your beliefs (political beliefs, religious, etc.)
Your personal story (your interpretation of the past, your
expectations regarding the future)
Your problems (illnesses, financial situation, victim mindset,
etc.)
Your age
Your job
Your social status
Your role (as employee, homemaker, parental status,
employment status, etc.)
Material items (your house, car, clothes, phone, etc.)
Your desires
The ego’s main characteristics
Here are some main characteristics of the ego:
The ego tends to equate ‘having’ with ‘being,’ which is why
the ego likes to identify with objects.

The ego lives through comparison. Your ego likes to compare
itself with other egos.
The ego is never satisfied. Your ego always wants more.
More fame, more stuff, more recognition, and so on.
The ego’s sense of self-worth often depends on the worth you
have in the eyes of others. Your ego needs the approval of
other people to feel valued.
The ego’s need to feel superior
Your ego wants to feel superior to other egos. It wants to stand out
and needs to create artificial separations to do that. Here are some
stratagems it employs:
Enhancing its value through people. If you have
smart/famous friends, your ego will associate with them to
strengthen its identity. This is why some people love to tell
others how smart, rich or famous their friends are.
Gossiping . People gossip because it makes them feel
different and superior in some way. This is why some people
like to put other people down and talk behind their back; it
makes them—and everybody else in their gossiping group—
feel superior.
Manifesting an inferiority complex. This hides a
desire to be better than others. Yes, even in this case, people
want to feel superior.
Manifesting a superiority complex. This hides the fear
of not being good enough.
Looking for fame. This offers the illusion of superiority,
which is why people often dream of becoming famous.
Being right. The ego loves to be right. It’s a great way for it
to affirm its existence. Have you noticed that everybody, from
Adolf Hitler to Nelson Mandela, believe they’re doing the right
thing? Most people think they are correct. But can everybody
be right?

Complaining . When people complain, by definition they
believe they are right and others are wrong. It works with
objects as well. Have you ever bumped into a table and
complained or even insulted it? I have, and the darned table
was wrong to be in my way, wasn’t it?
Seeking attention. The ego likes to stand out. It loves
recognition, praise or admiration. To seek attention, people
may also commit crimes, wear eccentric clothes, or have
tattoos all over their body.
Your ego’s impact on your emotion
Understanding the way your ego works can help you better control
your emotions. To do this, you must first realize your current story is
the result of a strong identification with people, things or ideas. This
strong identification is the root of many of the negative emotions you
experience in your life. For instance:
When life doesn’t unfold according to your personal story you
get upset, or
When someone challenges one of your beliefs you become
defensive.
In short, most of your emotions are based on your personal story
and the way you perceive the world. As you replace your current
story with a more empowering one—while, at the same time, letting
go of your excessive attachment to things, people or ideas—you will
be able to experience more positive emotions. Later in this book,
we’ll see how you can change the way you interpret events.

Action step

Take a few minutes to answer the questions in the workbook,
(Section I. What Emotions are - 3. The nature of the ego ).

3

THE NATURE OF EMOTIONS

Emotions can be tricky. In this section, we’ll discuss in depth how
they work. By understanding the mechanism behind emotions, you’ll
be able to manage them more effectively as they arise.
The first thing to understand is that emotions come and go. One
moment you feel happy, the next you feel sad. While you do have
some control over your emotions, you must also recognize their
unpredictable nature. If you expect to be happy all the time, you set
yourself up for failure. You then risk blaming yourself when you ‘fail’
to be happy, or even worse, beat yourself up for it.
To start taking control of your emotions you must accept they are
transient. You must learn to let them pass without feeling the need to
identify strongly with them. You must allow yourself to feel sad
without adding commentaries such as, “I shouldn’t be sad,” or
“What’s wrong with me?” Instead, you must allow reality to just be.
No matter how mentally tough you are, you’ll still experience
sadness, grief or depression in your life—hopefully not at the same
time, and not continually. At times, you’ll feel disappointed, betrayed,
insecure, resentful or ashamed. You’ll doubt yourself and doubt your
ability to be the person you want to be. But that’s okay because
emotions come, but, more importantly, they go.
Your negative emotions are not bad or useless.

You may blame yourself for experiencing negative emotions or,
perhaps, you see yourself as mentally weak. You may even believe
something is wrong with you. However, despite what your inner voice
may say, your emotions aren’t bad. Emotions are simply emotions.
Nothing more.
As such, being depressed doesn’t make you less of a person than
you were three weeks ago when you were happy. Feeling sad now
doesn’t mean you’ll never be able to laugh again.
Remember this: the way you interpret emotions, as well as the
blame game you engage in, creates suffering, not the emotions
themselves.
In fact, negative emotions can actually be helpful. Sometimes, you
need to touch rock-bottom before you can reach the top. Even the
toughest people on earth become depressed. Elon Musk never
imagined he would have a mental breakdown, but he did and he
bounced back. After losing his fiancée, Abraham Lincoln was
depressed for months. This tragic event didn’t prevent him from
becoming president of the United States. Negative emotions often
serve a purpose. They may serve as a wake-up call. They may help
you learn something positive about yourself. Of course, when you’re
under their spell, it may be difficult to look at the bright side of things,
but in hindsight, you may realize emotions—even sad ones—had
their role to play in your ultimate success.
The positive role of negative emotions
Your emotions are not here to make your life harder, but to tell you
something. Without them, you wouldn’t grow.
Think of your negative emotions as the emotional equivalent of
physical pain. While you hate being in pain, if you didn’t have pain,
chances are you would be dead by now. Physical pain sends a
powerful signal that something is wrong, nudging you to take action
of some kind. It could be to consult your doctor, which may lead you
to undergo surgery, change your diet, or increase exercise. Without

physical pain, you wouldn’t do any of these things and your situation
would worsen, potentially leading to a premature death.
Emotions work the same way. They signal you to do something
about your current situation. Perhaps, you need to let go of some
people, quit your job, or remove a disempowering story that creates
suffering in your life.
The fleeting nature of emotions
No matter how depressed you are, how much grief you’re
experiencing, or how horrible you feel at a given point in time, this
shall pass.
Look at some of the negative emotions you experienced in the past.
Remember the worse times in your life. During these most difficult
periods, you were probably so caught up in your emotions you
imagined never being able to escape them. You couldn’t imagine
being happy again. But even these episodes ended. Eventually, the
clouds dissipated and the real you shone again.
Your emotions come and they go. Your depression will go, your
sadness will vanish and your anger will fade away.
Bear in mind, if you experience the same emotions repeatedly, it
probably means you hold disempowering beliefs and need to change
something in your life. We’ll discuss how later.
If you suffer from severe, chronic depression, it might be a good idea
to consult a specialist.
The trickiness of emotions
Have you ever felt you’ll never be happy again? Have you ever been
so attached to your emotions you thought they’ll never go away?
Don’t worry, it’s a common feeling.

Negative emotions act as a filter that taints the quality of your
experiences. During a negative episode, every experience is
perceived through this filter. While the world outside may remain the
same, you will experience it in a completely different way based on
how you feel.
For instance, when you’re depressed, you don’t enjoy the food you
eat, the movie you see, or the activities in which you engage. You
only see the negative side of things, feeling trapped and powerless.
On the other hand, when you’re in a positive mood, everything in life
appears better. Food tastes great, you’re naturally friendlier, and you
enjoy all the activities you partake in.
You may now believe that, armed with the knowledge you have
gained from this book, you’ll never be depressed again. Wrong!
You’ll keep experiencing sadness, frustration, depression, or
resentment, but hopefully, each time these occur, you’ll become
wiser and wiser, remembering that this too, shall pass .
I have to admit, I can easily be fooled by my emotions. While I know
I am not my emotions, I still give them too much credit and fail to
realize they are just temporary visitors. More importantly, I fail to
remember they are not me. Emotions always come and go, but I
remain. Once, the emotional storm has passed, I generally feel like
an idiot for having taken my emotions so seriously. Do you?
Interestingly, external factors might not be—and often aren’t—the
direct cause of a sudden change in your emotional state. You can be
in the exact same situation, with the same job, the same amount of
money in your bank account, and have the same problems as
always, but experience radically different emotional states. In fact, if
you look at your past, this is often what happens. You are mildly
depressed for a couple of hours or a few days, before bouncing back
to your ‘default’ emotional state. During this period of emotional
stress, your environment doesn’t change at all. The only thing that
changes is your internal dialogue.
I encourage you to make a conscious effort to notice whenever such
events happen and start seeing through your emotions’ trickery. You

might want to go one step further and record these events in a
journal. By doing so, you will gain a deeper understanding of how
emotions work and, as a result, you will be better equipped to
manage them.
The evil power of emotions
An emotion usually represents an amplified energized
thought pattern, and because of its often-overpowering
energetic charges, it is not easy initially to stay present
enough to be able to watch it. It wants to take you over, and
it usually succeeds—unless there is enough presence in
you.
—E

T

,T

P

N

.

Negative emotions are like a spell. While you’re under their
influence, breaking free from them seems impossible. You may know
dwelling on the same thoughts is pointless, yet you can’t help but go
along with the flow. Feeling an intense pull, you keep identifying with
your thoughts and, as a result, feel worse and worse. When this
happens, no rational argument seems to work.
The more these emotions fit your personal story, the stronger the pull
becomes. For instance, if you believe you aren’t good enough, you
may experience negative emotions such as guilt or shame each time
you judge what you do is ‘not good enough.’ Because you’ve
experienced these emotions so many times before, they have
become an automatic response.
For more information on how the identification with emotions works
refers to the section “Identification”.
The filtering power of emotions

Your emotional state can drastically affect your outlook on life,
leading you to act and behave differently.
When you’re in a positive state, you have more energy available.
This gives you:
More confidence in everything you do
An openness to consider new actions that could improve your
life
The ability to leave or break out of your comfort zone
More emotional room to persevere during tough times
Better ideas and enhanced creativity, and
Easy access to positive emotions within the same emotional
range.
When you’re in a negative state of mind, you have less energy
available, giving you:
A lack of confidence that affects everything you do
A lack of motivation that reduces the scope of actions you’re
willing to take
A reluctance to take on new challenges and leave your
comfort zone
A reduced ability to persevere in face of setbacks, and
A propensity to attract negative thoughts within the same
emotional range.
Let’s have a look at a real example.
Real life example:
Let me share with you a real example from my own life. Both cases
happened under the same external conditions. The only difference
was my emotional state at the time.
Case 1 - Feeling excited about my online business:

More confidence in everything I do: I feel as though my ideas
are good. I’m excited to work on my books and eager to write
articles. I am open to sharing my work and promoting it.
An openness to consider new courses of action: I am open to
new ideas or to work on a new project. I can think of ways to
collaborate with other authors and start building a new
coaching program to offer my audience.
The ability to get out of my comfort zone: It becomes easier
for me to push myself beyond my comfort zone. I may contact
people I don’t know, or run ‘Facebook Lives’ for instance.
More emotional room to persevere: I stick to my projects even
when I lack motivation.
Better ideas and enhanced creativity: I am open to new ideas.
I might come up with new ideas for books, articles or other
creative projects.
Easy access to more positive emotions: I attract more positive
emotions. At the same time, my mind rejects negative
thoughts more easily, by refusing to identify with them.
Case 2 - Feeling mildly depressed due to my lack of results:
A lack of confidence: I start doubting myself and all the
projects I’m currently working on. Suddenly, everything I do
becomes useless or ‘not good enough.’ Thoughts like,
“What’s the point?”, “I’m not going to make it,” or “I’m stupid,”
cross my mind. Needless to say, promoting myself becomes a
major challenge.
A lack of motivation: I don’t feel like doing anything. I’m
attacked by, and am unable to escape, negative thoughts. I
have the same negative thoughts again and again, which
repeat like a broken record. They seem so real and taint all
my experiences.
A difficulty to take on new challenges: I have little energy left
over to leave my comfort and undertake challenging projects.
A reduced ability to persevere: I have difficulty finishing tasks
and I procrastinate over tasks I ‘should’ be working on.

A propensity to attract negative thoughts: I attract more and
more negative thoughts. Although these thoughts may have
been crossing my mind before, now they stick fast. By
identifying with these thoughts, I generate more negative
emotions.
Both cases happened only a few days apart. The external
environment was the exact same, but my emotional state was
radically different and led me to take different actions.
The magnetic power of emotions
Your emotions act like magnets. They attract thoughts on the same
‘wave.’ That’s why, when you’re in a negative state, you easily attract
other negative thoughts, and by latching onto these thoughts you
make the situation worse.
As Eckhart Tolle wrote in The Power of Now:
Often, a vicious circle builds up between your thinking and
the emotion: they feed each other. The thought pattern
creates a magnified reflection of itself in the form of an
emotion, and the vibrational frequency of the emotion keeps
feeding the original thought pattern.
—E

T

Now, let’s see what you can do to break free from that magnetic
power
Breaking the magnetic power of emotions
Let’s say you have a bad day at work
The negative state you’re in causes
thoughts. Suddenly, you fixate on the
and start beating yourself up over it.

and you’re in a terrible mood.
you to attract more negative
fact you’re still single at thirty
Then, you blame yourself for

being overweight. You also remember you have to go to the office
the following Saturday which reminds you how much your job sucks.
Do you see how much easier it is to attract negative thoughts when
you’re feeling low? To prevent this from happening, it is essential you
remove the habit of clustering negative thoughts together.
Real life example:
I have knee problems, which prevents me from practicing many
sports. Since I’ve always loved sports, these injuries have been a
source of emotional pain. Fortunately, I seldom feel pain in my
knees, but when I do, it can trigger negative emotions. One day, as I
was observing my thought process—we all have different hobbies,
haven’t we—I realized experiencing pain in my knees negatively
affected my mood, triggering more negative emotions in a negative
feedback loop. The pain would cause me to focus on all the things
that were going wrong, from my work to my personal life. As a result,
I would experience negative emotions for hours, or even days.
The point I’m making is, no matter how great your life is, if you spend
most of your time focusing on your problems, you’ll become
depressed. Thus, to reduce negative emotions, you must learn to
compartmentalize your issues. Don’t let your mind over-dramatize
things by clustering unrelated issues. It will only make you feel
worse. Instead, remember that negative emotions exist only in your
mind. Taken separately, most of your issues aren’t such a big deal,
and there is no rule that says you have to solve them all at once.
Start noticing how you feel. Record your negative emotions. Look at
what triggers them. The more you do this, the more you will uncover
certain patterns. For example, let’s say you felt sad for a couple of
days, ask yourself the following questions:
What triggered my emotions?
What fueled them over the two-day period?
What story was I telling myself?
How and why did I get out of my slump?
What can I learn from this episode?

Answering these questions will be invaluable and will greatly help
you deal with similar issues in the future.
Your emotional accessibility
We previously saw you attract thoughts that matched your emotional
state. The opposite is also true. You can’t attract thoughts that are
out of sync with how you feel at any given time. Even if you tried to
think positive thoughts, your mind wouldn’t be receptive to them.
This is why during periods of sadness, while positive thoughts may
cross your mind from time to time, you won’t be able to associate
with them and you won’t be able to change your emotional state.
Your emotional set point
Have you ever been told to cheer up when you were grieving, or
express gratitude when you were depressed? Did it help? It probably
didn’t. This is because the emotional state you were in didn’t allow
you access to these emotions.
In their book, Ask and It is Given, Ester and Jerry Hicks offer a
model to explain how emotional ranges are connected and how we
can move up the ladder from negative, to more positive emotions.
For instance, in this model, depression or hopelessness is at the
bottom of the ladder followed by anger. What it means is that when
you feel depressed, signs of anger indicate you’re climbing the
emotional ladder. This makes sense. When you’re angry you have
more energy than when you’re depressed, right?
Recently, after being depressed for a while, I experienced feelings of
anger. For some reason, I got tired of the stories and excuses
running through my mind, and I used the anger as a fuel to complete
the tasks I had been avoiding. As a result, I was able to create
momentum and climb the emotional ladder.
Whenever you experience negative emotions, watch for emotions
that give you more energy. So-called negative emotions like anger
can help you overcome even more disempowering emotions, like

hopelessness. Only you know how you feel. Therefore, if anger feels
better, accept it.
Emotions and mental suffering
Did you know you create a lot of unnecessary pain in your life? Each
time you lock on to a thought, or hold onto an emotion, you suffer. A
great example of this is how you react to physical pain. Whenever
you feel pain, your first reaction is to interpret it. When you do so,
you generate negative thoughts. Your identification with these
thoughts is what creates mental suffering. Below are some of the
thoughts that may cross your mind in these situations:
What if this pain never goes away?
What if I can’t do X, Y, Z anymore because of the pain?
What if it gets worse?
What if I need to undergo surgery?
What if I can’t go to work? I have an important project I must
finish on time
With this pain, today’s going to be challenging
I don’t have money. How will I pay hospital bills if things get
worse?
This internal dialogue creates suffering but does nothing to help
solve the problem. You can still function properly and take
appropriate actions without dwelling on any of the above worries.
Negative emotions are not the problem, the mental suffering you
create out of these emotions is.
Another example of mental suffering is procrastination. Have you
ever delayed starting a task for days or weeks just to realize it wasn’t
a big deal once you’d completed it? I have. What was the most
exhausting part, the task itself, or the time you spent worrying about
it?
Or perhaps you didn’t sleep long enough and keep telling yourself
today’s going to be a rough day. As you imagine all the tasks you

need to do, you already feel exhausted.
Psychologists have shown that mental suffering is what consumes
most of your energy. After all, sitting at a desk all day shouldn’t be
that tiring, yet many of us feel exhausted at the end of the day. In his
classic book, How to Stop Worrying and Start Living, Dale Carnegie
wrote the following:
One of America’s most distinguished psychiatrists, Dr. A. A.
Brill, goes even further. He declares, “One hundred percent
of the fatigue of the sedentary worker in good health is due
to psychological factors, by which we mean emotional
factors.
—D

C

People inflict a tremendous amount of suffering on themselves. As
you continue reading this book, you’ll realize the idiocy of this
activity. You’ll notice people around you dwelling on a past they
cannot alter. You’ll see your family members and friends worrying
about a future they cannot predict. You’ll witness people having the
same repeated thoughts, running in circles to fight a problem that
exists only in their mind. For thousands of years, mystics have told
us that problems are in our mind. They have repeatedly invited us to
look within. Yet, today, how many people are listening?
Too many of us are addicted to our problems. Instead of letting go,
we complain, we play the victim, we blame other people, or we
discuss our problems without doing anything to solve them. To
reduce this mental suffering, we must refuse to interpret our
emotions in a negative and disempowering way.
Why problems don’t exist
If we go one step further and look at reality in an objective way, we
can say that problems don’t actually exist. Here is why:

What you don’t focus on doesn’t exist: A problem
only exists when you give it your attention. From your mind’s
perspective, what you don’t give any thought to doesn’t exist.
Let’s take a hypothetical example. Imagine you lost your legs.
If you accept that fact immediately and refuse to give it any
thought, there will be no problem and thus, no mental
suffering. You would simply be living in reality, (of course,
that’s usually not what happens).
A problem exists only in time: A problem can only exist
in the past or in the future. And where do the past and future
exist? In your mind. To acknowledge a problem, you must use
your thoughts, and thoughts exist in time, not in the present
moment.
A problem needs to be labeled as a problem to
actually exist: A problem exists only when you interpret a
situation as being a problem. Otherwise, there is no problem.
This concept may be hard to grasp at first, but it’s a key theory. In the
next section, we’ll look at the different components affecting your
emotions.

Action step
Explore the nature of emotions using the workbook (Section I. What
Emotions are - 4. The nature of emotions ).

PART II

WHAT IMPACTS YOUR EMOTIONS

Your mind operates on the famous computing principle of
GIGO - garbage in, garbage out. If you do ill, speak ill and
think ill, the residue is going to leave you sick. If you do well,
speak well and think well, the outcome is going to be well.
—O S

,AM

T

.

Emotions are complex, and a variety of factors influence how you
feel. In this section, we’ll cover some of the elements affecting what
drives your emotions. The good news is, you have some control over
them.
If we exclude spontaneous emotional reactions resulting from your
survival mechanism, most of your emotions are self-created. They
result from the way you interpret thoughts or events. However, these
aren’t the only elements that affect your emotional state. Your body,
your voice, the food you eat, or how much you sleep, also play a role
in determining the quality of your emotions and therefore the quality
of your life.
Let’s see how each of these elements impact your emotions.

4

THE IMPACT OF SLEEP ON YOUR MOOD

The quality of your sleep and how much of it you get affects your
emotional state. You’ve probably experienced the side effects of
sleep deprivation yourself. Perhaps, you felt grumpy, unable to
concentrate, listless, or had difficulty dealing with negative emotions.
Sleep deprivation can impact mood in many different ways.
According to a survey performed on people suffering from anxiety or
depression most of the respondents reported receiving less than six
hours sleep per night.
Sleep deprivation also increases mortality risk. A 2016 study
conducted by researchers at non-profit organization, RAND Europe,
estimated that people sleeping less than six hours a night had a
thirteen percent increased mortality risk than people sleeping
between seven and nine hours. The same studies revealed that lack
of sleep cost an estimated $411 billion per year to the United States
economy.
Interestingly, sleep deprivation also seems to reduce an individual’s
ability to enjoy positive experiences. One study shows that, while
people who had enough sleep did experience a positive effect from
such experiences, no such effect was generated in people who were
sleep deprived.

How to improve the quality of your sleep
There are many ways to improve the quality of your sleep. Let’s go
over some of them:
Make sure your bedroom is pitch black. Many
studies have shown that the darker the bedroom is, the better
we tend to sleep. If your room isn’t pitch-black, what can you
do to make it darker? Maybe you can buy a sleep mask, or
curtains that do a better job at blocking daylight.
Avoid using electronic devices. This applies to
smartphones, tablets, televisions, and the like. According to
SleepFoundation.org, “Studies have shown that even our
small electronic devices emit sufficient light to miscue the
brain and promote wakefulness. As adults, we are subject to
these influences, and our children are particularly susceptible
”. A 2014 study published in PNAS showed that melatonin, a
chemical which helps regulate sleep patterns, was reduced by
fifty percent in participants who read with electronic devices
rather than books. These participants took about ten minutes
longer to fall asleep and lost ten minutes of deep sleep (also
known as REM). Participants also reported feeling less alert
in the morning. If your device has a light setting for nighttime
use, it may still have a negative impact on your sleep, but just
test the night setting and see if it makes a difference to your
sleep patterns. If you absolutely have to use electronic
devices at night, considering wearing glasses that block the
blue light they emit. It’s best to put the glasses on a few hours
before you go to bed.
Relax your mind . If you’re like me, you may have all kinds
of thoughts running through your head when it’s time to fall
asleep. I tend to get very excited about new ideas I have, or
things I want to do. As a result, I often feel as though there
are so many things I could’ve completed during the day, and
these feelings make it difficult for me to sleep. Aside from
turning off electronic devices before bed, I’ve found that

listening to soothing music really helps. Reading a physical
book can also help me relax (as long as I don’t get too excited
by the book, which has been known to happen.)
Avoid drinking too much water within two hours
of going to bed. This one is obvious, but still worth
mentioning. If you have to go to the bathroom in the middle of
the night, it’s going to interrupt your sleep pattern. This, of
course, will probably make you more tired the next day.
Have an evening ritual . This alone will help you fall
asleep more easily. It’s best to try going to bed at the same
time every night, including the weekends. If you like to go out
during the weekend and stay up late, this will present a
challenge, but I encourage you to give it a try and see how it
goes. An evening ritual will also help you stay on track with
your morning ritual. It will be easier to wake up every day at
the same time without feeling tired if you have a morning and
a nighttime ritual. If you do go out and stay up late during the
weekend, one thing you can do is still wake up as early as
during the weekdays and have a couple of naps throughout
the day as necessary.
If you have difficulty sleeping well, try to implement some of the
things mentioned above. The best advice I can give you is to keep
trying different strategies until you figure out what works best for you.

5

USING YOUR BODY TO INFLUENCE YOUR EMOTIONS

Our bodies change our minds, our minds change our
behavior, and our behavior changes our outcomes.
—A

C

,

.

Body language and body posture
By changing your body language and your body posture you can
alter the way you feel. When you are confident or happy you expand
your body, and make yourself bigger. Have you noticed how men
straighten their backs, expand their chests, and tighten their
stomachs when they see an attractive woman? That’s an
unconscious behavior designed to show confidence and power (the
same way gorillas pound their chests).
In one of her experiments, Amy Cuddy, a social psychologist at
Harvard Business School, showed that participants who adopted a
high-power pose for just two minutes, displayed characteristics
similar to those of confident and powerful people. More specifically,
she noticed the following hormonal changes.
After adopting a high-power pose for two minutes:
Testosterone increased by 25%

Cortisol decreased by 10%, and
Risk tolerance increased, with 86% of participants choosing to
partake in a game of chance.
After adopting a low-power pose for two minutes:
Testosterone decreased by 10%
Cortisol increased by 15%, and
Risk tolerance decreased, with only 60% of participants
choosing to partake in a game of chance.
As you can see, you can actually change the way you feel merely by
changing your body posture or facial expression. It is what some
people call “fake it until you make it.” For instance, you can put a
smile on your face to make you feel happier. Conversely, you can
negatively affect your mood and even create a depression by
changing your body posture.
David K. Reynolds, in his book Constructive Living , explained how
he changed his identity for his alter ego, David Kent, and created a
depressed, suicidal patient. The goal was to be accepted as an
anonymous patient into various psychiatric facilities to assess them
from the inside. Note that he wasn’t simulating depression, he was
actually depressed. Psychological tests proved it. Here is how he
created depression:
Depression can be created by sitting slouched in a chair,
shoulders hunched, head hanging down. Repeat these
words over and over: ‘There’s nothing anybody can do. No
one can help. It’s hopeless. I’m helpless. I give up.’ Shake
your head, sigh, cry. In general, act depressed and the
genuine feeling will follow in time.
—D

The benefits of exercising

K. R

,C

L

.

According to Michael Otto, professor of psychology at Boston
University, “Failing to exercise when you feel bad is like explicitly not
taking an aspirin when your head hurts. ”
When the time came for ‘David Kent’ to bring David K. Reynolds
back to life, what do you think he needed to do? He needed to
change his body position. Easy to say but hard to do when you’re
clinically depressed. Of course, he knew that better than anybody
else. Still, he had to force himself to become physically active,
despite not wanting to do so. As he started increasing his physical
activity and getting busy, he felt better and better until he fully
recovered.
David Kent’s story shows that regular exercising improves, not only
your physical well-being, but also your mood. Studies have shown
that exercising can treat mild to moderate depression as effectively
as antidepressants. In one study , James Blumenthal, a clinical
psychologist at Duke University, assigned sedentary adults with
major depressive disorders to one of four groups: supervised
exercise, home-based exercise, antidepressant therapy, or a
placebo pill. After four months Blumenthal found that patients in the
exercise and antidepressant group had the highest rates of
remission. In his conclusions, he stated that exercise has more or
less the same effect as antidepressants.
When he followed up with the same patients a year later, Blumenthal
discovered that people who were still exercising regularly had lower
depression scores than people who only exercised sporadically.
Exercise seems to not only help treat depression, but also to prevent
relapse. So, when it comes to mastering your emotions, make sure
exercising is part of your toolbox.
Fortunately, you don't have to run ten miles a day to reap the
benefits of exercise. Simply walking for thirty minutes, five days a
week can work wonders. According to research published in PLoS
Medicine, two and a half hours moderate exercise a week could add
three and a quarter years to your lifespan. Another study of five
thousand people in Denmark showed that individuals who exercised

regularly lived five to seven years longer than sedentary
counterparts.
As for the benefits of exercising on your mood, they are both
immediate and long-term. Professor of psychology, Michael Otto,
says you usually derive a mood enhancement effect within five
minutes of partaking in moderate exercise. And, as we’ve just seen,
exercising regularly improves your long-term mental health and can
be as effective as antidepressants.
What about you? What activity are you going to take on to improve
your mental and physical health?

6

USING YOUR THOUGHTS TO INFLUENCE YOUR EMOTIONS

You become what you think about all day long.
—R

W

E

,

.

Your thoughts define who you are and create your reality. That’s why
you should channel your thoughts towards what you want , not what
you don’t want . As the success expert Brian Tracy says, “The key to
success is to focus our conscious mind on things we desire, not
things we fear. ”
The benefits of meditation
In Buddhism, the mind is often referred to as the “monkey mind,”
because, Buddhists believe human thoughts are similar to a monkey
relentlessly swinging through trees. They are all over the place and
never seem to stop. Meditation helps tame the monkey and cure it of
restlessness. As you meditate, you become aware of the incessant
flow of thoughts popping into your mind. With practice, you learn to
distance yourself from thoughts, reducing their power and their
impact. As a result, you’ll experience less negative emotions and feel
more at peace.
The benefits of visualization

Did you know your subconscious can’t clearly distinguish real
experiences from ‘fake’ ones? This means you can trick your mind
by simulating desired experiences through visualization. The more
details you visualize, the more your brain will interpret the
experience as real.
By using visualization to elicit positive feelings such as gratitude,
excitement, or joy, you can condition your mind to experience more
positive emotions, as we’ll see in more depth in the section
“Conditioning your mind.”

7

USING YOUR WORDS TO INFLUENCE YOUR EMOTIONS

Your words have more impact on your thoughts and behaviors than
you might realize. Because your thoughts, words, and behaviors are
all interconnected, they influence each other. For instance, when you
lack confidence, you use certain words such as “I’ll try,” “I hope,” or “I
wish.”). Conversely, using specific words can make you feel less
confident. This also means you can boost your confidence by using
certain words such as, “I will.” For instance, saying “I will change
career,” or “I will complete this project by the end of this month,” will
make you feel more confident than saying, “I hope I can change
career,” or “I’ll try to complete this project by the end of this month.”
To enhance your confidence, replace words that show self-doubt
with words that display confidence as shown below.
Words to be avoided:
Would/could/should/might
Try/hope/wish
Maybe/perhaps
If everything is okay
If everything goes well
Words to be used instead:

I will
Absolutely
Definitely
Of course
Sure
Certainly
Obviously
Without any doubt
No problem
The power of positive affirmations
Positive affirmations are sentences you repeat to yourself on a
regular basis until your subconscious mind accepts them as true.
Over time they help you condition your mind to experience positive
emotions such as confidence or gratitude. For more information on
how to condition your mind refer to the section, ‘Conditioning your
mind.’
How to use positive affirmation
Use the present tense and not the future tense, (“I am” not “I
will”).
Avoid negative forms like “I am not shy.” Instead, use “I am
confident.”
Repeat the sentence again and again for five minutes.
Do it every single day without exception for a month, and
preferably longer.
Use visualization at the same time and involve your emotions.
Some examples of powerful affirmations:
I love being confident.
I am independent of the good or bad opinions of others.
I am beneath no one and no one is beneath me.

I love you …. (add your name and say it while looking into
your eyes in the mirror, e.g. “I love you, Thibaut”. (Awkward,
isn’t it?)
Thank you.
Exercise
• Use positive affirmation for five minutes daily.
• Notice words that show a lack of commitment, confidence or
assertiveness. Go over your emails before you send them and
remove phrases such as, “I’ll try,” “I should,” “I hope,” etc. Replace
them with, “I will,” or something equally assertive. For the next three
weeks, challenge yourself to avoid using words showing a lack of
confidence.
Additional tip:
The world-famous life coach, Tony Robbins, has been using what he
calls “incantation,” for decades before meeting a client or holding a
seminar. He uses both his body and certain phrases to put himself in
the right state and to reach a level of absolute certainty. As you
perform your own affirmations, try engaging your body as well.
Remember, your words and your body affect your emotions.

8

HOW YOUR BREATHING AFFECTS YOUR EMOTIONS

You can stay without food or sleep for days, but you cannot survive
past a few minutes without oxygen. While breathing should happen
naturally, the truth is that many people don’t know how to breathe
properly. As a result, they don’t generate as much energy as they
could. These individuals tire more easily than others, which affects
their mood and make them more prone to experience negative
emotions.
Proper breathing benefits you in different ways. Slowing your
breathing helps reduce anxiety. In Breathwalk: Breathing Your Way
to a Revitalized Body, Mind and Spirit, Gurucharan Singh Khalsa and
Yogi Bahjan mentioned the following benefits from slow breathing:
Eight breathing cycles per minute : Relief from stress and
increased awareness.
Four breathing cycles per minute : Intense feelings of
awareness, increased visual clarity, heightens bodily
sensitivity.
One breathing cycle per minute : Optimized cooperation
between brain hemispheres, dramatic calming of anxiety, fear,
and worry.
Rapid breathing such as the Breath of Fire, allows you to release
stress, be more alert and have more energy alongside with other

benefits. (You can watch a tutorial video here ). For a more general
overview on how to breath properly, I invite you to watch the video
here . For more on how to use breathing to change your mood you
can refer to Breathwalk: Breathing Your Way to a Revitalized Body,
Mind and Spirit or search out other books on breathing.

9

HOW YOUR ENVIRONMENT AFFECTS YOUR EMOTIONS

Your environment also influences the way you feel. By environment, I
mean everything around you can affect you in some way. It could be
people you hang out with, TV shows you watch, or the place you
live. For instance, negative relatives may drag you down, while a
messy desk may be demotivating.
I’ve noticed that when I feel demotivated, decluttering my desk,
cleaning my room, or reorganizing files on my computer often gives
me a boost of motivation.
For more on how you can use your environment to change your
emotions see the section, ‘Changing your Environment.’

10

HOW MUSIC AFFECTS YOUR EMOTIONS

We all know music affects our mood. Who hasn’t listened to Rocky’s
song while working out? For instance, music can:
Help you relax when you’re tired
Motivate you when you’re in a slump
Help you persevere when you’re at the gym
Help you access feelings of gratitude, and
Put you in a positive mood state.
Some studies have shown that listening to positive music can help
people boost their mood. In a study conducted in 2012, participants
reported higher positive mood after listening to a positive song for
just twelve minutes, five times, over a two-week period. Interestingly,
it only worked with participants who were told to make an effort to
boost their mood. Other participants didn’t report such mood
improvement.
Another study conducted in 2014 showed that music can help
reduce negative mood and boost self-esteem as indicated below:
Specifically, the most significant results of the music
interventions on the psychological side can be identified in
the aspects more closely related to mood, especially in the
reduction of the depressive and anxiety’s component, and in

the
improvement
of
the
emotional
expression,
communication and interpersonal skills, self-esteem and
quality of life.
Valerie N. Stratton, Ph.D. and Annette H. Zalanowski, of Penn State
University, also studied the effect of music on mood. They asked
their students to keep music diaries for two weeks. Stratton
concluded that:
Not only did our sample of students report more positive
emotions after listening to music, but their already positive
emotions were intensified by listening to music.
Interestingly, the music genre and the context in which students
listened to the music didn’t affect the result. Students’ mood
improved whether they listened to rock or classical music, or whether
they were at home, driving, or socializing.
Using music to condition your mind
You can go one step further and use the power of music to condition
your mind by creating playlists tailored to your emotional needs.
Building playlists is time-consuming, but well worth the effort. The
world-class endurance athlete and coach, Christopher Bergland,
uses music to help him stay motivated and perform at his best. This
is what he wrote in an article published in Psychology Today :
As an athlete, I developed an ideal mindset for peak
performance and used an arsenal of time-tested songs to
fortify this alter ego and invincible state of mind. During my
training and races it became obvious that even in really
horrible weather conditions, or when I was physically
suffering, that I could use music (and my imagination) to
create a parallel universe that had little to do with reality. I
used music to stay optimistic and see the glass as
perpetually half-full while doing ultra-endurance races. You

can use music as a tool when you work out or in your daily
life the same way.
Christopher also enjoys listening to specific songs before a big
interview or when he does public speaking. Personally, I like to listen
to songs that make me feel grateful. What about you? How can you
use music to improve your mood?
Exercise - Experiment with different types of music.
Experiment with different types of music and see how you can use
them to boost your mood. For instance, you could use music to help
you meditate, work out, or do your homework. As you do so, keep
the following points in mind:
Everybody is different : don’t listen to a song because
it’s popular. Listen to it because it makes you feel the way you
want to feel. We all have different musical tastes. The only
thing that matters is how you feel when you listen to music.
Keep experimenting : Listen to different types of music
and see how they make you feel. Are you inspired?
Motivated? Happy? Relaxed? Start creating playlists for
specific moods you want to experience.

Action step
Use the workbook to design new strategies to better take control of
your emotions (Section II. What impact your emotions ).

PART III

HOW TO CHANGE YOUR EMOTIONS

The mind always seeks to deny the Now and to escape from
it. In other words, the more you are identified with your mind,
the more you suffer. Or you may put it like this: the more you
are able to honor and accept the Now, the more you are free
of pain, of suffering—and free of the egoic mind.
—E

T

,T

P

N

.

In this section, we’ll explore how you can deal with negative
emotions and condition your mind to experience more positive ones.
First, we’ll discuss how emotions are formed. Then, we’ll discuss the
benefit of positive thinking and how to use it to condition your mind.
After that, we’ll see why positive thinking isn’t enough and what else
you can do to deal with negative emotions. More specifically, you’ll
learn:
How to let go of your emotions
How to change your story and create a more empowering one
How to condition your mind
How to use your behaviors to change your emotions, and

How to modify your environment to reduce negative emotions.
Finally, I’ll share with you a list of short-term and long-term strategies
you can use to better deal with negative emotions.
Let’s get started.

11

HOW EMOTIONS ARE FORMED

When a thought emerges on the canvas of your mind, if you
don’t drop it, its pursuit will either take the form of a desire or
an emotion, positive or negative.
—O S

,AM

T

.

Few people know how emotions are formed. While we experience
them all day long, we seldom—if ever—take time to understand why
we are feeling certain emotions and how they came into existence.
First, let’s differentiate two types of negative emotions. The first type
are the negative emotions you experience spontaneously. These are
the emotions that keep you alive such as the fear our ancestors felt
when they encountered a saber-tooth tiger.
The second type of negative emotions are the ones you create in
your mind by identifying with your thoughts. These emotions aren’t
necessarily triggered by external events—although they may be.
These emotions tend to last longer than the first type. Here is how
they work:
A random thought arises. You identify with that thought. This
identification creates an emotional reaction. As you keep identifying
with that thought, the related emotion grows stronger until it
becomes a core emotion. Let’s look at some examples:

You have money problems, and each time your mind comes
up with money-related thoughts you identify with them. As a
result, your worry about money intensifies.
You had an argument with your friend and fell out with him.
You can’t stop replaying the scene in your mind. As a result,
months have passed and you still haven’t called to make up
with your friend.
You made a mistake at work and are ashamed of yourself.
You keep revisiting the same thought over and over. As a
result, your feelings of inadequacy grow stronger.
Your tendency to identify with negative thoughts repeatedly is what
allows them to grow stronger. The more you focus on your financial
challenges, the easier it will be for related thoughts to arise in the
future. The more you replay the argument with your friend in your
head, the stronger the feelings of resentment will grow. Similarly, as
you keep thinking of the mistake you made at work, you invite
feelings of shame and intensify the situation. The point is, when you
give thoughts room to exist, they spread and become major points of
focus.
This simple process of identification allows seemingly inoffensive
thoughts to take control of your mind. This identification with your
thoughts, and more importantly, how you choose to interpret them,
creates suffering in your life.
Now, let’s see in more detail how your emotions are formed. This will
help you better deal with negative emotions while allowing positive
emotions to grow. Here is a formula to explain how emotions form:
Interpretation + identification + repetition = strong emotion
Interpretation: is when you interpret an event or a thought
based on your personal story.
Identification: is when you identify with a specific thought
as it arises.

Repetition: is having the same thoughts over and over.
Strong emotion: is when you experience an emotion so
many times it has become part of your identity. You then
experience that emotion whenever a related thought or event
triggers it.
Altogether, interpretation, identification and repetition give room for
emotions to grow. Conversely, whenever you remove one of these
elements from the equation, these emotions start losing their power
over you.
To sum up, for an emotion to grow in intensity and duration, you
must first interpret an event or a thought, then, you must identify with
that thought as it arises, finally, you must repeat the same thoughts
again and again—and identify with it.
Now, let’s discuss in more depth each component of the formula.
1. Interpretation
Interpretation + identification + repetition = strong emotion
Negative emotions always result from your interpretation of events.
That’s why two different people might react to the same event in
different ways. One might be devastated, while the other might be
unaffected.
For instance, for a farmer rain could be a blessing, but for someone
going on a picnic it would be seen as a curse. That’s because of the
meaning they give to the event. In short, for negative
emotions to arise, you must add your interpretation to
a specific event. The event in itself cannot trigger negative
emotions without your consent.
So, why do you keep experiencing negative emotions? I believe it’s
because reality fails to meet your expectations.

You want reality to be one way, but it turns out to be another.
You go on a picnic and want the weather to be good, but it
rains.
You want a promotion at work, but you don’t get it.
You want to make money with your side business, but it’s not
working.
Your interpretation of reality creates suffering in your life. Reality in
itself can never be upsetting. This is worth repeating. We’ll discuss in
depth how you can change your interpretation in the next section
entitled, ‘Changing your story.’
2. Identification
Interpretation + identification + repetition = strong emotion
Now, let’s focus on the second part of the formula: identification.
For an emotion to survive long term, there must be a process of
identification. Emotions cannot persist unless you give them your
attention. The more you focus on your emotions—and identify with
them—the more powerful they become.
People often feel the urge to identify with their emotions and find
themselves unable to disengage from them. They fail to realize one
of the most important truths in this world: you are not your
emotions . Your emotions will come and they will go.
So, when you catch yourself saying, “I’m sad,” remember you are
incorrect. Nobody has ever been sad, because your emotions are
not who you are. They can appear to be you, but they will soon
disappear, like clouds in the sky. Think of yourself as the sun, and
the sun is always there whether or not you perceive it—whether or
not its hidden by the cloud.
You are not your emotions. You are not sad, you merely experience
feelings that you may call ‘sadness’ at a given point in time. This is
an important point. I hope you can see the difference.

Another way to see your emotions is as the clothes you wear. What
emotional clothes are you wearing right now? Are they clothes of
excitement? Depression? Sadness? Bear in mind, tomorrow, or a
week from now, you will likely be wearing different clothes.
How long you wear your clothes (your emotions) depends on how
much you love them (i.e. how much you're attached to your
emotions). An emotion in itself is powerless. What gives it power is
your conscious or unconscious identification with it. That’s why an
emotion given no attention will eventually fade away. Try the
following exercise:
Whenever you’re angry, get busy with any activity requiring your full
attention. You’ll see your anger quickly dissipate. Conversely, keep
dwelling on the feelings of anger, and you’ll see it grow until it
becomes one of your major emotional states.
3. Repetition
Interpretation + identification + repetition = strong emotion
We’ve seen that the way you interpret an event or a thought
determines how you feel. We also know that, as you identify with
your thoughts or feelings, they become emotions. Now, if you keep
repeating that process, you’ll condition your mind to experience
these specific emotions (positive or negative).
For instance, if you focus your attention on what (you believe) your
friend did to you, feelings of resentment will grow. As a result, you
could hold a grudge for months. People often do this. They waste
time holding onto negative emotions that serve no purpose just
because they can’t let go of them.
Conversely, if you disengage from your thoughts of resentment and
simply observe them, over time they will lose power and the
associated resentment will fade away. In fact, if you had let go of the
thought of resentment immediately after it arose, your feelings of
resentment would have dissipated almost instantly. We’ll see how

you can let go of your emotion in the section, ‘Letting go of your
emotions.’

Action step
Resist negative emotions from the past using the workbook, (Section
III. How to change your emotions - 1. How emotions are formed ).
Recall the last time you felt anger, sadness, frustration, fear, or
depression. Now, write down what happens for each of the following:
Interpretation: What events happened and what thoughts
arose?
Identification: How did you respond to these thoughts?
Repetition: Did you identify with these thoughts repeatedly?

12

CHANGING YOUR INTERPRETATION

The sight of a slaughterhouse may trigger a negative
emotion in you, whereas it may be positive for the business
owner and natural for the machine operator. It all depends
on how you are conditioned.
—O S

,AM

T

.

In itself, an event or a thought has no power to alter your emotional
state. What generates emotions is the way you choose to interpret
the event or thought. This is why two people can react differently to
the same situation. One will see a problem and blame external
circumstances, while the other will see an opportunity to be
embraced. One will get stuck, the other will grow.
The way you interpret events is closely linked to general
assumptions you hold about life. As such, it is essential we first delve
into the underlying assumptions that lead to these interpretations.
Exploring your assumptions
To enter a given emotional state, you made certain assumptions
regarding how things should be. These assumptions constitute your
subjective reality. Because you’re convinced they are true, you don’t
question them.

Below are some examples of assumptions you may have:
Problems should be avoided
This is a problem
I should be healthy
I’ll live at least until I’m seventy
I must get married
Complaining is normal
There is nothing wrong with dwelling on the past
I need to worry about the future, and/or
I can’t be happy unless or until *insert your answer(s) here*.
Now, let’s look at each one of these assumptions:
Problems should be avoided: Many people want to get rid of
their problems. But what if you can’t, and what if you don’t need to?
For sure, some people have ‘better’ problems than others, but
everybody has problems. What if the assumption that you shouldn’t
have any problems is wrong? What if you need to learn how to
dance in the rain and make the most of your problems? What if
problems are just challenges to be overcome—and part of life.
This is a problem: What if this thing you label as a problem is
actually not a problem? What if it doesn’t matter as much as you
think? What if it’s an opportunity in disguise? And how could you
make it so?
I should be healthy: We tend to take our health for granted, but
we cannot guarantee we won’t get sick tomorrow. What if your health
is a blessing and not necessarily the default position? Wouldn’t that
make you think of your health in a different way?
I’ll live at least until I’m seventy: You probably assume you’ll
live a long life, but what if that’s not the case? Isn’t living a long life a
blessing rather than something you should take for granted?
Unfortunately, some people die young, but that’s the nature of reality.

People say, “He died too young,” but is that correct? Isn’t it more
accurate to say that he just died? Neither too young nor too old.
I must get married. Maybe, maybe not. That’s just your
interpretation. ‘Shoulds’ are generally things society or your parents
expect you to do, but it doesn’t mean it has to be that way. These are
often cultural norms or conditioned behaviors.
Complaining is normal: Most complaining is a play of the ego
and is not constructive. It doesn’t help you and doesn’t change
anything. The only thing it does is strengthen your ego and offend
people. Try to spend an entire week without complaining and see
what happens.
There is nothing wrong with dwelling on the past: You
probably spend (too much) time dwelling on the past. Everybody
does. But do you realize the past exists only in your mind? And do
you realize you can’t change it no matter what you do? Learning
from your past is useful, dwelling on it isn’t.
I need to worry about the future: Worrying about the future is
unavoidable to a certain extent but it doesn’t help. Instead, you
should do the best you can in the present to avoid future problems.
I can’t be happy unless *insert your answer(s)*: You don’t
need to have the perfect life to be happy. Happiness is a choice you
need to make every day. You must practice it since, as we’ve seen
before, external factors won’t significantly affect your happiness.
These are just some examples of assumptions you may hold. My
intention here is to show you that your interpretations—and the
emotions generated from them—are largely the result of the
assumptions you hold about the world. Thus, to experience more
positive emotions, it is important you spend time revising your
assumptions.
Analyzing your interpretations

As we’ve already seen, you interpret events based on your
assumptions. Now, below are some questions to help you
understand what I mean by interpretations.
Do you think everything happens for a reason and embrace it,
or
Do you play the victim?
Do you believe temporary setbacks are just milestones that
will lead you to succeed, or
Do you give up when you encounter your first major setback?
Do you try to change things that cannot be changed, or
Do you accept them?
Do you believe you’re here for a reason, or
Do you wander through life without any clear purpose?
Do you believe problems are bad and should be avoided, or
Do you believe they are a necessary part of life?
Remember, what differentiates people who live a happy life from
people who are miserable is often how they choose to interpret their
lives.

Action step
Write down interpretations of your emotions using the workbook,
(Section III. How to change your emotions - 2. Changing your story ).
Write down:

One or two emotional issues you currently have. (Ask
yourself, “If I could get rid of some emotions, losing which
ones would have the most positive impact on my life?”)
Your interpretation of these issues. (Ask yourself, “What
would I need to believe for my story to be true?”)
New empowering interpretations that will help you deal with
these issues. (Ask yourself, “What do I need to believe to
avoid experiencing these negative emotions?”)

13

LETTING GO OF YOUR EMOTIONS

Emotions are just emotions. They are not you, they are not
facts, and you can let them go.
—H

D

,T

S

M

.

As we’ve seen, interpretation, identification and repetition can lead to
the creation of strong emotions. In this section, we’ll see what you
can do to start letting go of emotions that aren’t helping you achieve
the life you want.
E-motions are energy in motion, but what happens when you prevent
the energy from moving? It accumulates. When you repress your
emotions, you interrupt the natural flow of energy.
Sadly, nobody taught you how to deal with your emotions or even
that both, positive and negative emotions, are a natural
phenomenon. Instead, they told you that your negative emotions
should be repressed because they are bad.
As a result, you may have been repressing your emotions for years.
By doing so, you let them sink deeper into your subconscious,
allowing them to become part of your identity. They have often
become patterns you may be unaware of. For instance, perhaps, you
feel you aren’t good enough. Or maybe you experience guilt on a

regular basis. These are the results of core beliefs you developed
over time by repressing your emotions.
Most of us have too much emotional baggage and need to learn to
let go of it. We need to declutter our subconscious and get rid of the
negative emotions preventing us from enjoying life to the fullest.
The fact is, your subconscious is already programmed to help you
deal with life. Your subconscious ensures you don’t accidentally
forget to breathe, keeps your heart beating and regulates your body
temperature among millions of other things. It doesn’t need
additional beliefs to function well. Neither does it need to ‘store’
emotions.
If you’re like most people, you spend the majority of your time living
in your head. As a result, you’re largely out of touch with your
emotions. To start letting go of your emotions, you must first become
aware of them by becoming more in touch with your body and the
way you feel.
Below are a few simple steps you can take to start letting go of your
emotions.
1. Observe your emotions with detachment
Whenever you experience a negative emotion, simply observe it with
as much detachment as you can. That means getting in touch with
your body. Realize that each thought or image crossing your mind
isn’t the emotion itself, it’s only your interpretation of it. Practice
feeling how it feels. Try to locate the emotion. Think of the way you
would describe the emotion to someone else. Remember don’t:
Engage in a story revolving around that emotion, and
Believe in whatever images or thoughts that arise when you
experience that emotion.
2. Label your emotion

Remember, emotions are merely temporary experiences, or if you
prefer, clothes you wear for a while. They aren’t ‘you.’
When you experience an emotion you say things like, “I am angry,” “I
am sad,” or “I am depressed.” Notice how you instantly identify with
your emotions. However, this is factually incorrect. The emotions you
experience have nothing to do with who you really are. If you were
your depression, you’ll be depressed all day long every single
second of your existence. Fortunately, that’s not the case.
Let’s assume you feel sad. Rather than saying, “I’m sad,” a more
accurate way to describe that emotion would be: “I feel sad,” or “I
experience a feeling of sadness.”
Can you see how different it is from saying, I’m sad? It gives you
more space to distance yourself from your emotions. The more you
become aware of your emotions, the more you can label them and
detach yourself from them, and the easier it will be to let go of these
emotions.
3. Let go of your emotions
Too often, you over-identify with your emotions and cling to them for
the following reasons:
They’re part of the story you’re telling yourself. Sometimes,
you can’t stop clinging to a story even a disempowering one.
Yes, you can become addicted to destructive stories despite
knowing they aren’t helping you.
You believe the emotions are you and feel a strong need to
identify with them. You may fall into the trap of believing you
are your emotions. As a result, you identify heavily with them,
which creates suffering.
Real life example:
I regularly felt that I wasn’t good enough. As a result, I believed I
should work harder. This belief led me to create lists of daily goals

that were impossible to complete even when working from morning
to night. I often fell short on my goals, which reinforced the belief that
I wasn’t good enough.
By realizing this was just a story, I started letting go of this belief.
After doing so, I noticed I was actually getting almost as much work
done but without the need to struggle and feel stressed out. I’m still
working on that issue, but I gain tremendous value from this process.
The challenging part was to let go of the attachment to my story by
letting go of the following:
The belief that I’m not good enough and must work harder
The pride I feel from working harder than most people
The victim mentality that comes from working hard while not
getting the results I want
The idea I’m somewhat ‘special’
The idea the world needs to be changed, and
The need to control the outcome of my actions.
As you can see, letting go of core emotions is not easy. They’ve
become part of our identity, and we often derive a twisted pleasure
from them. We may even wonder who we will be without them.
4. A five-step process to let go of emotions
In his book, The Sedona Method , Hale Dwoskin explains there are
three different ways to release your emotions as they arise. You can:
1. Let them go. When you experience negative emotions, you
can consciously choose to release them rather than
repressing them or clinging to them
2. Allow them to be here. You can allow them by acknowledging
their existence without clinging to them, or you can
3. Welcome them. You can accept them and have a closer look
at them to discover what the core of these emotions are.

According to Hale Dwoskin, the first step in each case is to become
aware of your emotions as they arise. He then introduces a five-step
process to let go of your emotions:
Step 1 : Focus on a certain emotion you would like to work on so
you can feel better. This doesn’t need to be a ‘big’ emotion. It could
be something as simple as not feeling like working on a specific task,
or being mildly annoyed about something.
Step 2: ask yourself one of the following questions:
1. Could I let this feeling go?
2. Could I allow this feeling to be here?
3. Could I welcome this feeling?
Depending on which way you want to go (release, allow, or
welcome), answer the corresponding question.
Step 3: Then ask yourself, “Would I?”
1. Would I let this feeling go?
2. Would I allow this feeling to be here?
3. Would I welcome this feeling?
Answer yes or no to each question while being honest with yourself.
Do you feel like you can let go/allow/welcome the emotion? Even a
‘no’ will help you let go of it.
Step 4: Ask yourself, “When”?
Your answer will be, “Now.” You let go of that emotion immediately.
Step 5: Repeat this process as many times as necessary for that
particular feeling to disappear.
You may be tempted to brush off this technique as overly simplistic
and ineffective. Don’t do that! Try it for yourself. Remember that you
are not your emotions. That’s precisely by practicing letting go of

them that you’ll realize that universal truth. As you make a conscious
choice to let go of your emotions, welcome them fully or allow them
to be, you’ll gain a whole new understanding of how emotions work
and how to release them.

Action step
Use the exercises in the corresponding section of the workbook to
start letting go of your emotions, (Section III. How emotions are
formed - 3. Letting go of your emotions ).
Make a list of all the emotions you would like to let go of. Perhaps
you feel as though you aren’t good enough. Perhaps you struggle
with procrastination and experience guilt and shame. Maybe you
blame yourself for something you did in the past, or you worry about
your future. Just write down whatever comes to your mind. Now, use
the method mentioned above.
Select one emotion then ask yourself:
“Could I let this feeling go?”
“Would I?” (Yes/no)
“When?” (Now)
Don’t worry if you’re not successful at first. You’ll have plenty of
opportunities to practice in the future.

14

CONDITIONING YOUR MIND TO EXPERIENCE MORE POSITIVE
EMOTIONS

Try to see that a thought about a person or event is merely a
thought about that person or event. It is the thought about
them that makes you feel the way you do. To change the
way you feel, change the way you think.
—V

H

,T

P

Y
S

.

We’ve discussed how emotions are formed and we’ve introduced a
process you can use to release your negative emotions. Now, let’s
see how you can condition your mind to start experiencing and
intensifying positive emotions in your life.
You are what you think about most of the time
For thousands of years mystics have told us we are the results of our
thoughts. Buddha allegedly said, “What you think, you become. ”
The essayist and poet, Ralph Waldo Emerson, said, “We become
what we think about all day long ,” while Mahatma Gandhi said, “A
man is but the product of his thoughts. ”
In his classic book, As a Man Thinketh, James Allen wrote,

Let a man radically alter his thoughts, and he will be
astonished at the rapid transformation it will effect in the
material conditions of his life. Men imagine that thought can
be kept secret, but it cannot; it rapidly crystallizes into habit,
and habit solidifies into circumstance.
—J

A

To take control of your emotions, it is essential you understand the
role your thoughts play in generating emotions in general. Your
thoughts activate certain emotions, and these emotions, in turn,
generate more thoughts. Thoughts and emotions then feed each
other.
For instance, if believed, the thought, “I’m not good enough,” will
generate negative emotions such as shame or guilt. Conversely,
when you feel ashamed for ‘not being good enough,’ you’ll attract
more thoughts in line with that belief. You will focus on the things
(you believe) you aren’t good at, or remember and dwell on past
failures. This, in turn, will strengthen your erroneous belief.
Thoughts generate emotions and emotions dictate your actions. If
you feel you don’t deserve a promotion, you won’t ask for it. If you
believe a man or woman is ‘out of your league,’ you won’t ask him or
her out.
In a nutshell, this is the way thoughts work. They generate emotions
that dictate your actions and shape your reality. While this may not
be obvious to you in the short-term, in the long-term, you’ll realize
your thoughts have a tremendous impact on your life.
Thoughts and emotions determine your future
Humans possess a power no other living beings have: their
imagination. We can use our thoughts to manifest things and turn the
invisible into the visible.

However, a thought in itself isn’t enough to manifest things or
circumstances. It must be fueled with an energy in the form of
emotion, such as enthusiasm, excitement, passion, or happiness.
For this reason, someone enthusiastic about his or her dream will
achieve more than a pessimistic and unmotivated person.
Successful people constantly focus on what they want with positive
expectation while unsuccessful people focus on what they don’t want
or what they lack. The latter are afraid of having a lack of money,
talent, time, or any other resources they may need to achieve their
goals. As a result, pessimists accomplish far less than they’re
capable of achieving.
Thus, one of the most important skills you can master is your ability
to control your thoughts and emotions. This entails understanding
what your emotions are, how they work, and what purpose they
serve. Later, we’ll discuss how you can use your emotions as a tool
for personal growth.
Depositing positive thoughts in your mind
Confident people deposit positive thoughts in their mind each day.
They celebrate their small wins and treat themselves with
compassion and respect. Naturally, they expect good things to
happen. On the other hand, people with low self-esteem bombard
their mind with disempowering thoughts. They discard their
accomplishments as ‘no big deal’ and fail to recognize their strengths
and the positive intent behind their actions. No wonder they feel
unworthy. (For more information read section, ‘Not being good
enough.’)
Both use their thoughts to distort reality, but who do you think is
better off? The person who deposits positive thoughts in their mind,
or the person who dwells on negative thoughts?
Does it mean positive thinking is going to solve all your problems
and eliminate your negative emotions once and for all? Of course,

not. Thought manipulation is simply one of the tools you can use to
master your emotions.
The limit of positive thinking
Repeating to yourself, “I’m happy, I’m happy, I’m happy,” all day long
won’t turn you into a living Buddha. You may benefit from it, but you’ll
still experience negative emotions. Unless you know how to deal
with negative emotions when they appear, you’ll fall prey to your own
disempowering story. This story could be why you’re such a loser or
why *insert your favorite disempowering story here*.
Interestingly, people are often addicted to their story—even the
negative ones—and are unable to let go of the ‘why’, because they:
Are fundamentally flawed
Will never be happy because *insert your favorite story*
Aren’t worthy of love
Are never going to make it, and
Will never get married, and so on.
I can guarantee you are addicted to a story. Now we’ll discuss how
you can condition your mind to experience more positive emotions.
After that, we’ll see how you can deal with negative emotions as they
arise.
Choosing the emotion(s) you want to experience
To condition your mind, the first step is to decide what emotion(s)
you want to experience more of. Do you want to be happier? More
motivated? More proactive? The second step is to put in place a
specific program to allow you to experience your chosen emotion(s).
The final step is to practice feeling that emotion every day.
Feeling the same emotion over and over allows you to better access
it. Neuroscience has shown that experiencing the same thought or
emotion repeatedly, strengthens the corresponding neural pathways,

easing future access to that thought or emotion. Put it simply, the
more you experience an emotion, the easier it becomes to generate.
That’s where daily conditioning comes into play.
To condition your mind to experience positive emotions, you can use
the method we introduced earlier:
Interpretation + identification + repetition = strong emotion
Here is how to use the formula in this situation:
Interpretation : Visualizing certain events or generating
particular thoughts you see as positive.
Identification : Identifying with these events or thoughts by
feeling the way you want to feel. To do this you can use all the
techniques we mentioned in the section, ‘What impacts your
emotions,’ such as positive affirmations and visualization.
Repetition : Keep repeating the same thoughts and
identifying with them. By doing so, you allow your mind to
access the related emotions more easily.
Below are some examples of practices you can use based on how
you want to feel:
1. Gratitude
To feel more grateful, make gratitude a daily routine. Every morning,
focus on what you’re grateful for. The more you practice, the better
you’ll be able to focus on the positive side of things. Sadly, most of
us know we should be grateful, but we aren’t. That’s why we must
cultivate gratitude. As the late Jim Rohn said, “Our emotions need to
be as educated as our intellect. ”
Here are some exercises you can use to cultivate a feeling of
gratitude:

A. Write down things you’re grateful for: Take a pen and a
piece of paper, or even better, a dedicated notebook, and write down
at least three things for which you are grateful. This will help you
focus on the positive side of things.
B. Thank people who crossed your life: Close your eyes
and think of people you’ve met. As you picture them one after the
other, thank them while acknowledging at least one good thing they
did for you. If you happen to picture people you don’t like, thank
them anyway and still look for one good thing they did for you. It
could be making you stronger or teaching you a specific lesson.
Don’t try to control your thoughts, simply let the faces of people you
know come to your mind. Release any resentment you feel or have
felt.
C. Focus on one object and appreciate its existence:
Select one item in your room and think of the amount of work
and number of people involve in the process of creating it and
delivering it to you. For instance, if you select a chair, think of
all the work necessary to create it. Some people had to
design it, others had to find raw materials, and others had to
assemble it. Truck drivers had to deliver it to the store. The
store employees had to display it and promote it. You or
someone else had to go and collect it. The car you drive also
had to be built by other people, and so on.
Think of how you benefit from this chair: Remember a time
you were so tired you couldn’t wait to sit. Didn’t it feel great
when you could finally sit? Thanks to the chair you can not
only sit, but you can also use your computer, write, read, drink
coffee, or have a pleasant conversation with your friends.
D. Listening to gratitude song/guided meditation: Listen
to gratitude meditation. (Search, ‘gratitude meditation’ on YouTube)
2. Excitement

Sometimes, you lose excitement. You feel as though you’re running
in circles trapped in the same old routine. To generate more
excitement, spend a little time every morning visualizing all the
things you want. Get excited about these things. Below are several
ways to do it, (please note, this should be practiced on a regular
basis):
A. Write down what you want: Take a pen and piece of paper
and write, ‘What I Want,’ at the top of the page. Then, write down
anything you can think of that excites you.
B. Visualize what you want: Ask yourself, “What do I really
want?” and visualize all the things you desire. Try to be as specific
as possible. Clarity is power. Think of your ideal career, relationship
or lifestyle, or any goals you want to accomplish in the coming
decade or beyond.
C. Create a goals/dreams journal: Buy a notebook and write
down your goals in each area of your life. Review them each
morning and keep adding pictures, drawings or anything else to
foster your enthusiasm.
D. Vividly envision your ideal day:
What would you eat for breakfast?
How would you spend your day?
With whom would you spend your day?
What would you do in the evening?
Where would you live?
How would you feel?
You can have several versions of your ideal day. Just make sure
each version excites you.
3. Confidence/certainty

If you want to have more confidence in your ability to achieve your
goals, visualize yourself as having already accomplished them, and
feel good about it. Practice developing a sense of certainty. Commit
to your vision in your mind. Each time you visualize your goal, give
the energy of commitment to it. Know it’s going to happen.
4. Self-esteem
To boost your self-esteem, keep track of your daily
accomplishments. You do many things right, but you tend only to
remember things you do wrong. No wonder your self-esteem suffers.
Buy a notebook and dedicate it to this purpose. Record your
accomplishments every day. Some examples of accomplishments
would be:
I woke on time
I ate some fruit
I cleaned my desk
I completed Project A
I exercised
I completed my morning ritual, and/or
I read.
As you can see, you don’t have to write down anything big. In fact,
by writing down small accomplishments, you condition your mind to
look for more wins, which, over time, enhances your self-esteem.
For more exercises related to self-esteem refer to the section: ‘Not
feeling good enough.’
5. Decisiveness
As you practice being more decisive, you’ll boost your productivity,
which will affect your well-being. As we’ll see in the section,
‘Procrastination,’ stalling can create a lot of emotional suffering.

To become more decisive, you can use the 5 Second Rule ,
introduced by Mel Robbins in her book of the same name. In it, Mel
Robbins argues there is only one rule when it comes to productivity,
success, or getting everything you ever wanted: you have to do
something whether you feel like it or not. If you can do the things you
don’t feel like doing, you’ll get everything you’ve ever wanted.
Her 5 Second Rule states you have five seconds from the
moment you have an idea to the moment you take action. If you fail
to act within these five seconds, your mind will talk you out of it. The
nature of the mind is to prevent us from doing anything scary or
tiring. For instance, you have five seconds to:
Introduce yourself to someone you want to talk to at an event
Send that important email, or
Ask a question during a meeting.
Exercise - Strengthen your decisiveness
To practice the 5 Second Rule, you can start with small things.
Make a list of things you procrastinate over. Perhaps you put
off washing the dishes, or cleaning your home. Maybe, you
delay calling someone or sending some emails. Write it down.
Now, select a couple of things on which you’ll use the 5
Second Rule . Commit to using the rule for at least a week.
When you think of washing the dishes, calling someone, or
*insert your chosen task*, count down from five to zero, and
take action before you reach zero.
Common mistakes to avoid when conditioning your
mind:
As you condition your mind to experience more positive emotions,
avoid making the following mistakes:

Trying to implement too many changes at once :
Stick to one or two exercises for a month or so before trying
any other exercises.
Starting too big : Keep it small and make sure the
exercises aren’t too challenging. Remember, taking control of
your emotions is a long-term game. It’s a marathon, not a
sprint.
To learn in more about how to create an exciting morning ritual,
please consult my book , Wake Up Call: How to Take Control of Your
Morning and Transform Your Life.

Action step
Refer to the corresponding section in the workbook and choose the
emotion(s) you want to experience more of, (Section III. How to
change your emotions - 4. Conditioning your mind ).

15

CHANGING YOUR EMOTIONS BY CHANGING YOUR BEHAVIOR

Action seems to follow feeling, but really action and feeling
go together, and by regulating the action, which is under the
more direct control of the will, we can indirectly regulate the
feeling, which is not.
—W

J

,
.

We’ve seen you can influence your emotions by using your body,
mind, or words. We’ve also discussed how you can change your
interpretations of thoughts or events to change your emotional state.
Unfortunately, when negative emotions suddenly arise or are too
strong, changing your body posture or using positive affirmation
might not be enough. In fact, trying to replace a negative emotion by
a more positive one often fails. You cannot always overcome
depression by cheering up or counteract grief by deciding to just ‘feel
good.’ Neither can you expect profound sadness to disappear by
repeating the phrase/mantra, “I’m happy, I’m happy, I’m happy.”
However, you can influence the way you feel by changing your
behavior. As you alter your behavior, your feelings will change
accordingly. It may happen almost immediately, as when you distract
yourself from mild anger by performing a task. Or it may take weeks

or even months while you deal with profound emotions such as
intense grief or depression.
To start changing the way you feel, whenever you experience a
negative emotion, ask yourself the following questions:
“What causes that emotion?” and
“What can I do about my present reality?”
After asking these questions, identify concrete actions you could
take to change your emotional state.
Remember, by nature, emotions will fade as time passes. That is,
unless you reinforce them by replaying the same situation over and
over in your mind. Below are some real-world examples to help you
better understand how it works:
Example 1:
If, after your boyfriend or girlfriend broke up with you, you keep
remembering the good times you had together with sadness, it will
take longer to get over the break-up. Although there is nothing wrong
with feeling sad or remembering the past, if you want to move on, a
better option is to avoid revisiting the past wherever possible. In this
case, changing your behavior would be: do your best to stop
revisiting the old memories.
Example 2:
If you constantly worry about an upcoming presentation at work,
changing your behavior might be rehearsing your speech for hours.
Doing this, you’ll know the text so well you’ll be able to perform well
even under pressure. To give yourself an even better chance at
success, you could also rehearse in front of your colleagues or
friends.
Example 3:
If you’ve been resenting a particular friend for weeks because of
something he said or did, changing your behavior might be having

an honest talk with him and share your feelings. This will allow you to
clear the air, clarify any misunderstandings, and avoid building up
resentment. Oftentimes, we misinterpret events, or see things that
aren’t there.
Example 4:
Sometimes, you feel sad, angry, or even depressed, and can’t do
anything about it. In this instance, the best you can do is to avoid
focusing on your feelings, and just let them be. Your job here is to do
what you have to do and live your life until these emotions fade.
Don’t forget to practice letting go of negative emotions as they arise.
As you learn to detach yourself from the negative emotions, it will
help prevent them from growing and becoming more entrenched.

Action step
Using the workbook, let’s do an exercise using an example from your
life, (Section III. How to change your emotions - 5. Changing your
emotions by changing your behaviors ).
Remember the last time you experience a negative emotion
that lasted more than a couple of days.
Now, think of what you did specifically to overcome this
negative emotion (if anything).
Then, ask yourself, “How could I have changed my behavior
to influence my emotions positively?”

16

CHANGING YOUR EMOTIONS BY CHANGING YOUR
ENVIRONMENT

You cannot always control your emotions. Certain events, such as a
breakup, the loss of a loved one, or a severe disease, can trigger
negative emotions.
However, you do have control over some events. Do you have daily
life situations that affect your peace of mind? What if you could do
something about them?
Sometimes, to reduce negative emotions you simply need to avoid
putting yourself in the situations generating them in the first place.
Perhaps, you watch too much TV, which makes you miserable. Or
maybe, seeing your friends (seemingly) happy on Facebook makes
you feel like a failure. Why not spend less time in such situations?
Real life example:
Facebook was making me unhappy and I felt like a failure. People in
my field were killing it and my friends looked so happy (or so I
thought). Not to mention the fact I was wasting hours of my time
mindlessly scrolling through my newsfeed. To overcome this drain on
my emotional ‘bank’, I drastically reduced the time I spent on
Facebook. Ever since making the decision, I’ve been feeling better.
This example shows you that small changes can enhance your wellbeing. If you look at the things you do daily, you’ll find activities or
behaviors that don’t support your happiness. Just removing one or

two of these activities, or changing some of your behaviors, may
noticeably improve your mood.
You may already know what you should do, but it’s also possible
you’re unaware of the cost of some of your behaviors on your wellbeing.
Below, I’ve listed some examples of activities or behaviors that may
rob you of your happiness. Ask yourself whether they’re contributing
to your overall sense of well-being:
Watching TV: Although watching TV can be fun, it’s also a
passive activity which may not contribute much to your
happiness.
Spending time on social media: Social media is
convenient and it allows you to keep in touch with your
friends, but it can also be addictive. Facebook or Twitter can
turn you into an addict craving the approval of others.
Hanging out with negative people: People you hang
out with have a tremendous influence on your emotional
state. Positive people will lift you up and help you achieve
your wildest dreams. Negative people will suck up your
energy, demotivate you and destroy your potential. As Jim
Rohn said, “You are the average of the five people you spend
the most time with. ” Make sure you surround yourself with
the right people.
Complaining and focusing on the negative: Do you
constantly see the negative side of things? Do you dwell on
the past? If so, how does this affect your level of happiness?
Not finishing what you start: Leaving tasks and
projects unfinished in your personal and professional life can
have a detrimental effect on your mood. Unfinished business
clutters your mind. Feeling overwhelmed or demotivated, is a
sign you may have too many ‘open loops’ in your life.
Examples of ‘open loops’ are unfinished projects you’ve been
procrastinating over, or avoiding people you need to talk to.

These are just a few examples. What about you? What activities or
behaviors rob you of your happiness?

Action step
Design a more empowering environment by completing the
corresponding exercises in the workbook, (Section III. How to
change your emotions - Changing your environment ).
Use the free workbook or take a pen and paper, and write down any
activities you believe may negatively impact on your emotions. Then,
for each activity, write down the consequence, (e.g. they make you
feel guilty, they demotivate you, they erode your self-esteem, etc.).

17

SHORT-TERM AND LONG-TERM SOLUTIONS TO DEAL WITH
NEGATIVE EMOTIONS

No other life-form on the planet knows negativity, only
humans, just as no other life-form violates and poisons the
Earth that sustains it. Have you ever seen an unhappy
flower or a stressed oak tree? Have you come across a
depressed dolphin, a frog that has a problem with selfesteem, a cat that cannot relax, or a bird that carries hatred
and resentment? The only animals that may occasionally
experience something akin to negativity or show signs of
neurotic behavior are those that live in close contact with
humans and so link into the human mind and its insanity.
—E

T

,T

P

N

.

In this section, I will provide you with a list of exercises or techniques
you can use to better deal with negative emotions. No matter how
much control you have over your mind, you’ll still experience a whole
bunch of negative emotions in the future, from mild frustration to
depression. You’d better be prepared.
I’ve listed below some things you can do to deal with negative
emotions and have included both long-term and short-term solutions.
1. Short-term solutions

The following techniques will help you manage negative emotions as
they arise. Try them out, and keep the ones that work for you.
A. Change your emotional state
Distract yourself: An emotion is only as strong as you
allow it to be. Whenever you experience a negative feeling,
instead of focusing on it, get busy right away. If you’re angry
about something, cross something off your to-do list. If
possible, do something that requires your full attention.
Interrupt: Do something silly or unusual to break the
pattern. Shout, do a silly dance or speak with a strange voice.
Move: Stand up, go for a walk, do push-ups, dance, or use a
power posture. By changing your physiology, you can change
the way you feel.
Listen to music: Listening to your favorite music may shift
your emotional state.
Shout: Talk to yourself with a loud and authoritarian voice
and give yourself a pep talk. Use your voice and words to
change your emotions.
B. Take action
Do it anyway: Leave your feeling alone and do what you
have to do. Mature adults do what they have to do whether
they feel like it or not.
Do something about it: Your behavior indirectly changes
your feelings. Ask yourself, “What action can I take in today to
change the way I feel?” Then, go do it.
C. Become aware of your emotions

Write it down: Take a pen and paper and write down what
you worry about, why, and what you can do about it. Be as
specific as possible.
Write down what happened: Take a piece of paper and
write down what exactly happened to generate the negative
emotion. Don’t write down your interpretation of it or the
drama you created around it. Write down the raw facts. Now
ask yourself, in the grand scheme of your life, is it really that
big a deal?
Talk: Have a discussion with a friend. You may be
overreacting, making things worse than they are. Sometimes,
all you need is a different perspective.
Remember a time when you felt good about
yourself: This can help you get back in that state and gain a
new perspective. Ask yourself the following questions, “How
did it feel?” “What was I thinking at the time?” “What was my
outlook on life at the time?”
Let your emotion go: Ask yourself, “Can I let that emotion
go?” Then, allow yourself to release it.
Allow your emotions to be: Stop trying to resist your
emotions or to change them. Allow them to be what they are.
Embrace your emotion: Stay with your emotions. Look at
them as closely as possible while doing your best to remain
detached. Become curious about them. What are they exactly
at their core?
D. Just relax
Rest: Take a nap or a break. When you’re tired, you’re more
likely to experience negative emotions than when you are
properly rested.
Breathe: Breathe slowly to relax. The way you breathe
affects your emotional state. Use breathing techniques to

calm you down, or to give you more energy.
Relax: Take a few minutes to relax your muscles. Start by
relaxing your jaw, the tension around your eyes and the
muscles on your face. Your body affects your emotions. As
you relax your body, your mind also relaxes.
Bless your problems: Thank your problems. Understand
they are here for a reason and will serve you in some way.
2. Long-term solutions
The following techniques will help you manage your negative
emotions long-term.
A. Analyze your negative emotions
Identify the story behind your emotions: Take a pen
and paper, and write down all the reasons why you have
these emotions in the first place. What assumptions do you
hold? How did you interpret what’s happening to you? Now,
see if you can let go of this particular story.
Write down your emotions in a journal: Take a few
minutes each day to write down how you felt. Look for
recurrent patterns. Then, use affirmations, visualization, or a
relevant exercise to help you overcome these emotions.
Practice mindfulness: Observe your emotions
throughout the day. Meditation will help you do this. Another
way is simply to engage in an activity while being fully
present. As you’re doing this, observe what’s going on in your
mind.
B. Move away from negativity

Change environment: If you’re surrounded by negativity,
change your environment. Move to a different place, or
reduce the time you spend with negative friends.
Remove counterproductive activities: Remove or
reduce the time you spend on any activity not having a
positive impact on your life. This could be reducing the time
you spend watching TV or surfing the internet.
C. Condition your mind
Create daily rituals: This will help you to experience
more positive emotions. Meditate, exercise, repeat
affirmations, create a gratitude journal, and so on. (The best
time to deposit positive thoughts in your mind is right before
going to sleep and first thing in the morning.)
Exercise: Exercise regularly. Exercise improves your mood
and is good for your emotional and physical health.
D. Increase your energy
The less energy you have, the more likely you are to experience
negative emotions.
Improve your sleep: Make sure you get enough sleep. If
possible, go to bed and wake up at the same time every day.
Eat healthier food: As the saying goes, “ You are what
you eat.” Junk food will negatively impact your energy levels,
so take steps to improve your diet.
Rest: Take regular naps, or take a few minutes to relax
Breathe: Learn to breathe properly.
E. Ask for help

Consult a professional: if you have deep emotional
issues such as extreme low self-esteem or depression, it
might be wise to consult a professional.

Action step
Write down one short-term and one long-term technique you want to
use. Ask yourself, “Among the items on the list, what is the one
technique that will best help me deal with negative emotions?”
(Section III. How to change your emotions - Short term solutions/long
term solutions ).

PART IV

HOW TO USE YOUR EMOTIONS TO
GROW

I suggest to you that every situation, every moment, provides
the opportunity for self-growth and development of your
character. Reality keeps bringing us circumstances—
sometimes I picture them as waves breaking on the shore—
and we have the chance to keep merging with that reality to fit
ourselves to it, to dive into those waves.
—D

K. R

,

C
L

.

We’ve seen what emotions are, how they are formed, and how you
can reprogram your mind to experience more positive emotions.
Now, let’s see how you can use your emotions as a tool for personal
growth.
Most people underestimate how useful emotions can be. They never
truly realize they can use their emotions to grow.
Think of it this way. Your emotions send you a message. They tell
you that your current interpretation of reality is biased. The problem
is never reality, but the way you interpret it. Never forget, you have
the power to find meaning and joy even in the worse situations.

For instance, Alice Sommer had every reason in the world to feel
hopeless. She was imprisoned in a concentration camp during WWII
and didn’t know how long she had left to live. She, nevertheless,
found joy. As she recalls:
I was always laughing. We were lying on the floor with my son,
and he saw me laughing. How can a child not laugh when the
mother laughs?
—A

S

Nick Vujicic believed he would never be happy. After all, he was born
with no arms or legs. As he said in one of the lectures he gave at a
school,
What kind of husband am I gonna be if I can’t even hold my
wife’s hand?
—N

V

Under these circumstances, nobody would have blamed him if he
had remained bitter all his life. However, he overcame his challenges
and today, in addition to being a successful motivational speaker,
he’s a happy husband and father of two.
These two examples show us we can overcome even the most
challenging situations. They show us negative emotions don’t last
forever. Challenging times in our life are often the events that allow
us to grow as human beings. Even a complete nervous breakdown
can serve as a wake-up call for people.
In this section, you’ll learn how emotions work and how you can use
them to grow, while simultaneously reducing the emotional suffering
they create.

18

HOW EMOTIONS CAN GUIDE YOU IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION

Emotions come and go and, ultimately, can’t define you. But it
doesn’t mean they don’t have a role to play. They can foster your
personal growth by reminding you of what you already know: you
need to make changes in your life. The more you ignore your
emotions, the louder they will become. It starts with a small voice, a
gut feeling or an intuitive knowledge. As you dismiss this sign, it gets
louder. Keep ignoring your emotions, and your body will begin to talk
in the same way as you experience physical pain.
For instance, let’s say you feel an emotion you identify as ‘stress.’
This tells you to make changes in your life. It could involve moving
away from a stressful situation, improving the situation, or changing
how you interpret it. One thing is sure, you need to do something
about it. If you keep ignoring stress or the stressor, it may result in
severe health issues.
The bottom line is, your emotions send you a message. In the same
way that physical pain tells you something is wrong with your body,
emotional suffering tells you something is wrong with your mind.
The power of self-awareness
Self-awareness is one of the most important components of your
personal growth. Without it, you can’t do much to change your life,
since you can’t change a problem unless you realize it exists.

So, what is self-awareness? Self-awareness is your ability to
observe objectively your thoughts, emotions, and behaviors without
adding your own interpretation or story to it.
Above or below the line?
In The 15 Commitments of Conscious Leadership , Jim Dethmer and
Diana Chapman introduced a very simple yet powerful model to help
increase self-awareness. This model is extremely simple: a single
line. The authors argue that, at any time, you’re either above or
below the line. When you’re above the line, you’re open, curious and
willing to learn, but when you’re below the line, you want to be
correct and, as a result, you tend to be defensive and closed to new
ideas. Put it simply, when you’re above the line you’re conscious,
when you’re below the line you’re unconscious.
Whether you are above or below the line depends on your emotional
state. When you sense a threat to your physical survival or to your
ego, you fall below the line and try to protect yourself in order for you
(or your ego) to survive. Conversely, when you operate above the
line, you’re in a positive state of mind. Your creativity, innovation, and
collaboration are at their best, resulting in enhanced performance.
Your ability to recognize when you fall below the line largely
determines how well you can control your emotional state. You can’t
change an emotion if you don’t notice its presence. This is what
being ‘aware’ or ‘conscious’ means. Below are some examples of
‘above the line’ and ‘below the line’ behaviors.
Above the line, you are:
Curious
Listening consciously
Feeling emotions
Discussing without being argumentative
Appreciating
Taking responsibility, and
Questioning your beliefs.

Below the line, you are:
Clinging to an opinion
Finding fault
Arguing
Rationalizing and justifying
Gossiping
Enrolling others to affirm your beliefs, and
Attacking the messenger.
Fear vs. love
Another simple model you can use is the Fear vs. Love Model .
Throughout your day, you either act out of fear or out of love. You act
out of fear when your focus is on getting something, be it other
people’s approval or attention, money or power. On the other hand,
when you act out of love, your main focus is on giving, be it your
time, money, love, or attention. You want to share and improve the
lives of people around you, not for your own interest, but simply for
the sake of it.
While your actions can simultaneously reflect your desire to give and
to receive, one or other of these components is generally more
pronounced. To master your emotions, you must learn to identify
whether you’re acting out of love or fear. For instance, look at one of
your major life goals. Is it a fear-based goal or a love-based goal?
Are you trying to give and contribute to the world, or are you trying to
take from it?
For instance, let’s say you want to become an actor. Some of the
reasons for that could be the following:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Making money
Being famous
Proving to your parents and friends you’re good enough
Entertaining people
Expressing yourself

The first three examples are usually fear-based behaviors: you want
to fill a void within yourself and demonstrate how good you are. The
final two examples are love-based behaviors that stress a desire to
express your gift to the world.
As we discuss in greater depth how different emotions work, keep in
mind these two models: above/below the lin e and fear-based
vs. loved based actions.
Note that throughout your day you often alternate between lovebased behaviors and fear-based behaviors. For instance, you may
be absorbed by a task that helps people and make you feel
complete. In this moment, you don’t need anything. Five minutes
later you may imagine how proud your father will be once you finally
earn a promotion. In this moment, you’re no longer feeling complete.
Instead, you are trying to get something, (in this situation, your
father’s approval).
Start noticing the underlying motivations behind your actions. As you
do so, you’ll begin to realize you spend a considerable amount of
time trying to earn other people’s approval, whether they be your
colleague, your boss, your parents, or your partner. Notice this, and
ask yourself what you can do to move from ‘wanting to get’ to
‘wanting to give.’
Now, with these two models in mind, let’s see how you can bring
more awareness to the emotions you experience in your day-to-day
life.

19

RECORDING YOUR EMOTIONS

The first step to improve the way you feel is to become more aware
of the emotions you experience on a regular basis. Before you can
generate more positive emotions, you must first determine your
starting point.
To shed a light on the emotions you’re experiencing in your daily life,
I invite you to record your emotions for an entire week. Use a
notebook or the downloadable worksheet to do so. Spend a couple
of minutes each day to record how you feel and rate yourself on a
scale of 1 to 10, 1 being the worst you can feel, and 10 being the
best you can feel. At the end of the week, give yourself an overall
score and answer the following questions:
- What negative emotions did you experience?
- What caused these emotions? What are the hard facts?
Did you have specific thoughts that lead you to feel that way?
Did external events trigger these negative emotions? Did you
lack sleep? Did you become ill? Were you in an accident?
- What really happened? (Not in your mind, but in the physical world)
- What was your interpretation of the facts?
- What would you need to believe to feel that way?

Are your beliefs accurate?
Could you have felt better by interpreting thoughts or events
differently?
- How did you return to your neutral state?
What happened exactly? Did you change your thoughts? Did
you take action on things you were avoiding doing? Did it just
happen naturally?
- What could you have done to avoid or reduce these negative
emotions?
Concrete example:
Let’s say you record your emotions for a week and notice that you
were mildly depressed for a couple of days. Here is what it could
look like:
What caused this emotion?
I was asked to do a task at work and felt unable on incompetent to
complete it.
What really happened?
I was asked to complete a task and I did it.
What was your interpretation of the facts?
I felt like I was incompetent and everybody in the office but
me could do the task.
I felt as though I should have been able to do the task well.
I felt as though everybody was judging me.
What would you need to believe to feel that way?
I would need to believe:

I am incompetent.
Being incompetent is unacceptable.
I should have been able to do that task.
Everyone is judging me.
Are your beliefs true?
Are you really incompetent?
Maybe I’m biased and I judged myself too harshly.
Is being incompetent unacceptable?
No. The fact is, I cannot always be competent at everything.
Should you be able to do that task?
I haven’t much experience performing similar tasks and there
was no way I could do it without asking for help.
Is it true that everyone judging you?
Some people may judge me, but that’s probably not true of
everyone. It’s also possible nobody really cares. After all, they
have their own issues to deal with. And what if nobody
noticed? Or perhaps, I did okay and the negativity is all in my
mind.
How did you return to your neutral state?
I realized it was actually no big deal. I asked a colleague whether I
did the task correctly. He helped me and gave me some advice. He
also recommended some good books to help improve my skills.
What could you have done differently to avoid or reduce this
negative emotion?

I could have asked someone to help me instead of trying to do
everything on my own.
As you go through this process, you’ll notice what causes you to
experience negative emotions. You’ll be able to identify selfdefeating behaviors and overcome then using daily conditioning and
affirmation.
Additional tip:
Remember to write down how you feel each day using a dedicated
journal. This will help you detach yourself from your emotions as you
realize ups and downs are a normal part of living.

Action step
Record your emotions using the workbook, (Section IV. How to use
your emotions to grow - Record your emotions ).

20

NOT BEING GOOD ENOUGH

When I won the Oscar, I thought it was a fluke. I thought
everybody would find out, and they’d take it back. They’d
come to my house, knocking on the door, ‘Excuse me, we
meant to give that to someone else. That was going to Meryl
Streep.
—J

F

You think, ‘Why would anyone want to see me again in a
movie? And I don’t know how to act anyway, so why am I
doing this?’.
—M

S

Do you feel as though you aren’t good enough? Guess what! You’re
not the only one. The other day I wrote the following to a fellow
blogger:
“There are a lot of topics I could write about but there are already so
many books out there. Sometimes, I’m like ‘What’s the point?’ ”
He replied:
“I know the feeling of, ‘What's the point?’ Everything worth saying
has already been said. And who am I to write about it anyway? What

have I achieved so far? Ah, well... I guess it's natural. Good to know
that we’re not the only ones struggling. ”
Whether or not you’re aware of it, millions of people feel the same
way. The feeling of ‘not being good enough’ alone must have killed
more dreams than anything else. And who has never felt that way?
Here is a (non-exhaustive) list of how I felt in my life:
I’m not a good enough writer
I’m not charismatic enough
I’m not competent enough
I’m not confident enough
I’m not courageous enough
I’m not disciplined enough
I’m not good enough at public speaking
I’m not handsome enough
I’m not inspiring enough
I’m not interesting enough
I’m not making enough money
I’m not muscular enough
I’m not patient enough
I’m not perseverant enough
I’m not pro-active enough
I’m not productive enough
I’m not smart enough
I’m not taking enough action
I’m not tough enough
I’m not working hard enough
My English isn’t good enough
My Japanese isn’t good enough, and
My memory isn’t good enough.
And I could go on.
People who feel they aren’t good enough tend to have low selfesteem. They focus on what they aren’t good at while filtering out all
the things they are good at. Try complimenting them and all you’ll

hear is, “It’s no big deal.” Worse, they may even think you’re being
polite, or trying to manipulate them. These people have a hard time
accepting compliments. Instead of a simple thank you, they return
the compliment, or downplay their role.
Perhaps, you’re acting the same way? See if you do one of the
following things when receiving a compliment:
1. Dismiss the whole thing as being no big deal: “Anybody could
have done it.”
2. Talk about all the things you did wrong while explaining what
you could have done better.
3. Try to return the compliment: “Thank you. I think you did a
fantastic job, too.”
Notice your inability to accept a compliment hundred percent in the
three cases above.
You may not only brush off your accomplishments, but also magnify
every single of your failure to reinforce the case you aren’t worthy.
You keep a long list of your failures, unwilling to let go of them as
they fit your story. Who would you be if you were no longer the man
or woman who’s never good enough? As strange as it may seem,
there’s something scary about that. At least, the certainty of not
being good enough gives you some comfort.
Imagine what would happen if you release the hold you have on your
story, try something you’ve always wanted to do, and fail. What you
suspected for a long time would become true: you aren’t good
enough. Or worse, what would happen if you were to succeed? How
would that fit into your story?
Remember, your brain is biased towards negativity. Adding your own
bias will certainly not help you feel good about yourself. The fact is,
you do most things well. Although a lack of experience, interest, or
talent may explain why you aren’t doing as well as you would like to
in certain areas, it has nothing to do with you not being ‘good’
enough.

How to use the feeling of not being good enough to grow
Not feeling good enough is a sign of low self-esteem. Many people
experience low self-esteem in various degrees. I certainly do. For
some, every single thing they do is insufficient. For others, they feel
inadequate only in certain situations or areas of their life. Wherever
you are on the self-esteem spectrum, you can probably benefit from
a boost in your self-esteem.
Identifying what triggers your feelings of inadequacy
The first step is to find out what triggers these feelings. What
thoughts are you identifying with? Which areas of your life are
concerned?
Take a few minutes to write down the following:
The situations in which you feel like you aren’t good enough,
and
The thoughts you identify with (your story).
Keeping track of your accomplishments
The second step is to keep track of your accomplishments. Not
feeling good enough often results from the biased view you hold
about yourself. You focus on your shortcomings, failing to
acknowledge your successes. People with healthy self-esteem tend
to look at themselves in a more objective way, acknowledging both
their shortcomings and their strengths.
To improve your self-esteem, start acknowledging all the things
you’re doing well. The following exercises will help you do that.
Exercise 1 - Create a win log
One of the best ways to acknowledge your accomplishments is to
write them down. For this exercise, I encourage you to use your
dedicated notebook.

1. First, write down everything you’ve accomplished in your life.
Come up with a list of fifty things. If you run out of things, write
smaller accomplishments. This will help you realize how much
you’ve already accomplished.
2. At the end of each day, write down all the things you’ve
accomplished that day. It can be simple things such as:
I woke up on time
I exercised, and
I ate a healthy breakfast.
Try to come up with five to ten things each day.
Exercise 2- Fill up your self-esteem jar
An alternative is to write down each thing you’ve accomplished on
separate pieces of paper and put them into a jar. Here are a few
recommendations to ensure you make the most out of this exercise:
Make sure your jar (or any other container you use) is in a
visible location. The best location is probably on your desk,
the second-best location is your bedroom.
Select a container you like. Choose a design you’re fond of.
It’s all about your self-esteem so anything that makes you feel
good is advisable. Make sure it is transparent so that you can
see it filling up.
Give it a positive name, (e.g. my self-esteem jar, declaration
of love to myself etc.).
Write your accomplishment on a paper you love. For instance,
use different colors so that when the jar fills up, it creates
something pleasant to the eye. One idea would be to use
origami paper.
Write with your favorite pen.
The idea is to show more respect towards yourself by acknowledging
your multiple accomplishments.

Exercise 3 - Create a positive journal
You can also create a journal to write down every compliment you
received that day. Your colleague told you your shoes look nice, write
it down. Your friend complimented your hair, write it down. Your boss
told you how well you did at a task, write it down as well. Don’t
question the sincerity of these compliments. Always assume they are
genuine. The idea is to train your mind to focus on the positive things
that happen in your life—they are happening whether or not you
acknowledge them. Here is how to make the most of that exercise:
Buy a notebook you like.
Personalize it: Add stickers, draw something, add pictures or
use different colors. Don’t want to do any of this stuff? That’s
fine as well. It’s your journal.
Keep it with you: Carry it with you and look for new
compliments to add to your amazing collection (optional).
Review it every day: Go through old entries and mentally
thank people who complimented you. You can say, “Thank
you *insert name*, I love you.” Feel free to read the old
entries in the morning, in the evening or both (or whenever
you feel like it). It’s up to you.
Again, this is your journal. These are just suggestions. Whatever
works for you .
Learning to accept compliments
Chances are you have difficulties accepting compliments. Do the
following sentences look familiar:
It’s never a big deal.
Everybody could have done it.
It’s because ‘so and so’ helped you.
I could have done it better.

Here is a great reason why you should accept compliments: because
the person who made the compliment wants you to
receive it, not to flush it down the toilets! Imagine you just
gave a gift to someone. How would you feel if that person, after
opening the box, dropped the gift to the floor, stepped on it and threw
it away? You won’t like it, would you? Sadly, that’s what we often do
when we receive a compliment. When we refuse to accept a
compliment, we are disrespecting the person who went out of their
way to deliver it. Wouldn’t you want your compliment to be accepted
wholeheartedly?
Exercise 1 - Accept compliments
This simple exercise will help you accept a compliment. Whenever
someone compliments you, say the following:
Thank you *insert the person’s name*.
That’s it. There is nothing simpler. No, “Thank you, but…”, “Thank
you, you too,” or “It wasn’t a big deal.” Simply say, “Thank you.”
Here is how to make the most of that exercise:
Say thank you out loud and clearly. You may discover you
have the tendency to repress your feelings and end up saying
thank you almost mechanically. In fact, you may realize
you’ve never really said, “Thank you,” with all your heart.
Let it sink in: Before you start a new sentence, give space for
the feeling of gratitude to express itself. Don’t downplay the
compliment or explain why you’re worthy (or unworthy) of it.
Tell it the way you feel it: Show your appreciation by telling the
person who complimented you how you feel. You may
experience resistance. Many of us have difficulties expressing
gratitude, because our pride prevents us from doing so. After
all, we’re strong and don’t need anybody’s help or
compliments, do we? We don’t want to feel vulnerable. If you
experience resistance and find the exercise difficult, recognize
this is normal.

Your ability to accept a compliment can be a good indicator of your
level of self-esteem. Practice accepting compliments and allow
yourself to feel vulnerable. Accepting you’re worthy of compliments
will help you boost your self-esteem.
Exercise 2 – The appreciation game
The purpose of this game is to learn to appreciate things in yourself
you didn’t previously acknowledge (or like). It will work well if you
have a partner you can play the game with on a regular basis. Tell
your partner three things you appreciate in them and ask them to do
the same. Be as specific as possible and don’t worry about coming
up with big things. Here are some examples:
I appreciate that you prepared breakfast this morning even
though you were in a rush.
I appreciate that you picked up the kids today.
I appreciate the way you always listen to my problems after
work.
To go further:
Self-esteem is a complex topic. It affects a lot of people and is often
misunderstood. Overcoming low self-esteem takes time and effort. If
you regularly feel you aren’t good enough, I encourage you to refer
to the following books. If, upon reading these books, you realize you
have severe and chronic self-esteem issues, you may want to
consult a specialist.
The Six Pillars of Self-Esteem, by Nathaniel Branden, PhD.
Breaking the Chain of Low Self-Esteem, by Marilyn Sorensen,
PhD.
Low Self-Esteem: Misunderstood & Diagnosed: Why You May
Not Find the Help You Need , by Marilyn Sorensen, PhD.
Below is a brief summary of some of the main ideas in each book:

In his book, The Six Pillars of Self-Esteem, Nathaniel Branden,
identified six practices (or pillars) of self-esteem you can work on to
develop a healthier self-esteem:
1. Living consciously: In Nathaniel Branden’s words, “to live
consciously means to seek to be aware of everything that bears on
our actions, purposes, value, and goals—to the best of our ability,
whatever that ability may be—and to behave in accordance with that
which we see and know.”
2. Self-acceptance: Is choosing to value yourself, to treat
yourself with respect and to stand up for your right to exist. Selfacceptance is the basis upon which self-esteem develops.
3. Self-responsibility : Is realizing no one is coming to save you
and you are responsible for your life. It is accepting that you are
responsible for your choices and actions. You are responsible for
how you use your time, and for your happiness. Because only you
can change your life.
4. Self-assertiveness: Means, honoring your wants, needs, and
values and seeking appropriate forms of their expression in reality.
5. Living purposefully: Is to use your powers to achieve the
goals you have selected. In other words, it’s your ability to set and
achieve goals in every area of your life.
6. Personal integrity: Is behaving in a way that matches your
ideals, convictions, and beliefs. It’s when you can look at yourself in
the mirror and know you’re doing the right thing.
In Breaking the Chain of Low Self-Esteem , Marilyn Sorensen
provides a great overview of what self-esteem is and how it works.
The author explains that low self-esteem stems from the negative
perception you hold of yourself—a perception that is largely, if not
entirely, based on your negative interpretations of past experiences.
This distorted perception of reality leads you to experience fear and
anxiety. Your family environment may have played a big part.

Perhaps, your parents have repeatedly put you down, making you
feel as though nothing you did was ever good enough.
You may now firmly believe you are less worthy than others. As a
result, you filter everything based on this negative image of yourself.
It’s as if you were looking at reality through tinted glasses; glasses
that discard praise and compliments, remembering only criticisms.
The examples in her books will help you understand how selfesteem issues manifest in real life. In addition, Ms Sorensen
provides dozens of practical exercises to help you become more
aware of your self-esteem issues and provide you the tool to develop
a healthier self-esteem.

Action step
Refer to the exercises in the corresponding section of the workbook,
(Section IV. How to use your emotions to grow - Not being good
enough ).

21

BEING DEFENSIVE

Our love of being right is best understood as our fear of
being wrong.
—K

S

,

.

Do you constantly justify yourself? Are you offended whenever
someone insults you or disrespects you?
There are very specific reasons why you get defensive. By becoming
conscious of these reasons, you’ll learn a lot about yourself and be
able to let go of that desire to defend yourself. First, let’s see why
you get defensive.
Why you get defensive
The need to defend yourself stems from your desire to protect your
story (or your ego). Every time your ego is threatened, you are
triggered and feel the need to defend it. I believe there are three
main reasons why you are triggered.
1. There is part of truth in what you were told.
2. You believe there is part of truth in what you were told.
3. A core belief you hold has been attacked.

Note that because we all have different stories, what triggers you
might not trigger someone else.
1. There is part of truth in what you were told
Someone mentioned something that is true about you and it hurts.
For instance, he or she may accuse you of procrastinating on a
certain project. Your inability to accept that truth is the reason you
become defensive. When that topic is brought up, it triggers
emotional reactions such as anger, denial or self-criticism.
2. You believe there is part of truth in what you were
told
You were told something you believe to be true and feel hurt. In this
case, the criticisms you received may be unfounded. Yet, you still
feel hurt. Why is that? It’s because what you were told confirms the
disempowering beliefs you hold about yourself. For instance, let’s
say you believe you aren’t good enough. This belief pushes you to
work harder than anybody else. Now, how would you feel if someone
accused you of being lazy? You would feel offended, wouldn’t you?
However, that wouldn’t be because you’re actually lazy, but because
of your belief that you should work harder.
3. One of your core beliefs has been attacked
Someone directly or indirectly attacks one of your core beliefs, and
you feel the need to defend yourself. This could be a religious belief,
a political belief, or a more general belief about the world or yourself.
The more attached you are to this belief, the stronger your emotional
reaction will be. Here is a great example:
Because they believed Donald Trump was evil, some Liberals had
strong emotional reactions after he was elected president. Some
shouted and even became violent. On the other hand, many
Conservatives were delighted by Trump’s victory.
How come people can react so differently to the same event? This is
because of their core beliefs. Both Democrats and Republicans

strongly identify with their political beliefs. This led hardcore
Democrats to burst into tears and hardcore Republicans to rejoice.
Whenever a belief you’re strongly attached to is
attacked or challenged, you’ll experience an emotional
reaction. The deeper the belief is, the stronger the emotional
reaction will be when it is attacked. An extreme example would be
someone ready to kill anybody who dares to criticize his or her
religion.
How to use this emotion to grow
Look at the situations that triggers you. Whenever you feel offended,
ask yourself why. What belief led you to defend yourself? Can you let
go of this belief? And is this belief really true?
By doing this, you’ll learn a great deal about yourself. You’ll be able
to let go of beliefs that aren’t serving you well, and you’ll realize that,
in most cases, you don’t even need to defend yourself.

Action step
Refer to the exercises in the corresponding section of the workbook,
(Section IV. How to use your emotions to grow - Getting defensive ).
Whenever you become defensive, remember to ask yourself the
following questions:
What am I trying to protect here?
Can I let go of that belief?
What would I be without that belief?

22

STRESS AND WORRY

Within every worry is an opportunity for positive action. In
every lie, there is a kernel of truth. Behind every neurotic
symptom is the misdirected desire to live fully and well.
—D

K. R

,C

L

.

Have you ever wondered what stress is and why you experience it?
Most people believe a situation can be stressful. The truth is, stress
doesn’t exist outside of yourself and, therefore, no situation can be
said to be stressful in itself. Yet, my guess is you experience stress
on a regular basis. And probably more often than you would like to.
Stress alone is responsible for tens of thousands of deaths every
year. Stress does more harm than many diseases and leaves
countless families grieving the loss of a loved one. This is why it is
essential you take active steps towards reducing your stress levels.
Taking responsibility for your stress
Stress is something you have some control over and, therefore, must
take responsibility for. The more you take responsibility for it, the
better you’ll be able to reduce it.

Stress happens for various reasons and manifests in numerous
situations. The traffic jam on your way to work, a business
presentation, tensions with your boss, or frequent disputes with your
spouse, all constitute potential sources of stress. There are two ways
you can reduce stress:
By avoiding situations you perceive as stressful, and
By becoming better at dealing with stressful situations.
We’ll see how you can use these methods to reduce your stress
levels.
How you can use stress to grow
Exercise - Make a list of your major sources of stress
Let’s look at specific situations that are sources of stress for you.
Using the workbook, write down what causes the most stress in your
typical week. Come up with at least ten things.
Reframing stress
Emotions arise as a result of your interpretation of events. The mere
fact you experience stress (or any other emotion) means you’ve
added your own interpretation to what is happening. Otherwise, you
would have a stress-free life.
Now, look at your list of stressful situations. For each situation ask
yourself the following questions:
Is that situation stressful in itself?
What do I need to believe to experience stress in that specific
situation?
What would I need to believe to reduce or remove stress in
that particular situation?

Let’s say you’re stuck in a traffic jam and you find it stressful.
Is that situation stressful in itself?
No, not necessarily. The traffic jam exists and there is nothing wrong
with it, per se .
What would I need to believe to experience stress in that specific
situation?
I would need to believe:
There shouldn’t be any traffic jams, and therefore, something
is wrong.
The traffic jam is a stressful event in itself.
I should be where I need to go, instead of being stuck in
traffic.
I can do something about it.
What would I need to believe to reduce/remove stress in that
particular situation?
I would need to believe that:
A traffic jam is a normal event like anything else.
I don’t necessarily have to experience stress just because I’m
stuck in traffic.
I’m here caught in a traffic jam and I don’t need to be there
(wherever I want to go), for a while.
I can’t do anything about it, so I might as well enjoy it, or at
least don’t stress over it.
Dealing with worry
Worry differs from stress as it isn’t the result of something you
experience in the present, but a concern you have regarding events
from the past or events that may happen in the future. You

experience stress when you face a stressful situation in the present
moment.
For instance, a stressful situation would be being stuck in a traffic
jam or having your boss yell at you. Worrying would be remembering
(past) or anticipating/imagining these stressful situations (future).
Interestingly, most of your worries are unnecessary for the following
reasons:
They happened in the past and there’s absolutely nothing you
can do about them, and/or
They may happen in the future and you can’t control the
future.
Exercise - Make a list of your worries
Make a list of things you worry about (past or future). They may be
similar to the things you wrote in the previous exercise. Examples of
things you may worry about are:
Your health
Your financial situations
Your work
Your relationships, and/or
Your family.
Now, write at least ten things you tend to worry about in a typical
week.
Sorting out your worries
Constant worry results from trying to control events over which you
have no control. When you do so, you create unnecessary stress in
your life. To deal with stress and overcome chronic worries more
effectively, it is essential you learn to sort out worries. An effective
way to do this is to separate the things you have control over from

the things you have no control over. You can divide your worries into
three separate categories:
1. Things you have control over
2. Things you have some control over, and
3. Things you have no control over whatsoever.
1. Things you have control over:
This category includes things such as your actions and behaviors.
For instance, you can choose what to say and how to say it. You can
also decide what actions you’ll take to achieve your goals.
2. Things you have some control over:
There are things you have only limited control over such as a
competition or a job interview. You can’t be absolutely certain you’ll
win a tennis match but you do have some control over its outcome.
For instance, you can choose to train harder or hire a great coach.
Similarly, you can prepare for a job interview by conducting
extensive research about the company you apply to, or by doing a
mock interview. You don’t, however, have absolute control over the
outcome of the interview.
3. Things you have no control over:
Unfortunately, there are also many things you have no control over.
These are things such as the weather, the economy, or traffic jams.
Exercise - Sort out your worries
Look at your list of stressful situations. Next to each item, put C
(control), SC (Some control), or NC (No control). This simple act of
sorting out your worries already helps reduce them. As you identify
things you have no control over, you can let go of your urge to worry.

Now, for things you have (some) control over, write down what you
could do about it. What concrete actions could you take to alleviate
them?
For things you have no control over, can you let go of your need to
control them and, instead, accept them?
Taking one hundred percent responsibility for your stress and
worries
What if you had more control over your worries than you believe?
Look at the situations you have no control over and ask yourself, “If I
had control over them, what would I do? What would it look like? And
how could I prevent them from happening?”
Often, you’ll realize you have some control over these situations.
This can be by changing, reframing or eliminating them from your
life.
Let’s say you identified traffic jams as something you have no control
over. This sounds reasonable. Once you’re caught in the traffic jam,
you can’t do much about it. But, could you do things differently? For
instance, could you leave home earlier or take a different route?
What about reframing the situation? Instead of escaping the situation
mentally, you could choose to be fully present by making traffic jams
a productive part of your day. You could then make the most of it by
listening to audiobooks. Imagine how much you could learn if you
listened to audiobooks every working day for an entire year.
Go over your list and look for things you have no control over. Write
down what you could do to change, reframe or eliminate these
events.

Action step

Refer to the exercises in the corresponding section of the workbook,
(Section IV. How to use your emotions to grow - Stress / Worry ).

23

CARING WHAT PEOPLE THINK OF YOU

How on earth can another’s thought about you harm you? It
is your thought about his thought that harms. Change your
thought.
—V

H

,T

P

Y
S

.

Are you overly self-conscious? In this section, I’ll explain why you
care so much what people think of you and what you can do alleviate
the situation.
You are the most important person in the world
First, realize you are the most important person in the world. If you
don’t believe me, remember the last time you felt intense pain.
Perhaps, it was toothache or surgery, or maybe, you broke your leg
in an accident. What were you thinking back then? Were you
concerned about the famine in Africa? Did you worry about innocent
people being killed in wars in the Middle East?
No.
The only thing you wanted is for the pain to go away. This is because
you are the most important person in the world. Since you must live

with yourself 24/7, it is normal to be concerned about your own
mental and physical well-being.
You have to realize the same goes for every other human on the
planet. For me, you’re not the most important person in the world—I
am. And, from their perspective, so are your close friends, family
members and colleagues.
Because you live with yourself 24/7 you incorrectly assume, often
unconsciously, people think about you significantly more often than
they actually do. In fact, for the most part, people do not care about
you. While it may sound depressing, it’s actually liberating. It means
you don’t have to worry so much what people think of you.
As the famous saying goes:
When you’re twenty, you care what everyone thinks, when
you’re forty, you stop caring what everyone thinks, and when
you’re sixty, you realize no one was ever thinking about you
in the first place.
While you keep track of all your mistakes and awkward moments,
nobody else does. People are simply too busy worrying about
themselves. In short, people don’t:
Keep track of your past failures
Read everything you post on social media
Remember your awkward moments
Think of you (very often), or
Care about you as much as you care about yourself.
Not everybody will love you
You care what other people think of you because you want them to
approve of you. You assume the best way to do that is to avoid
making waves. As a result, you may spend your whole life trying to
be the perfect person, hoping to be loved.

However, it usually doesn’t work. No matter how great you are, some
people won’t like you. You may try to ‘fix’ the image people have of
you, but that won’t work either. People will still see you the way they
want to, because of their own values and beliefs.
Thus, if you base your self-worth on what people think of you, you’ll
always be at the mercy of the approval of others. What will happen if
they suddenly disapprove of you? Unfortunately, no amount of
external approval will compensate for a lack of self-approval.
By trying so hard to be loved by everybody, you risk living a dull life
in which you’re unable to express your personality. You’ll end up
mimicking your friends, pleasing everybody around you, but
forgetting to please the most important person in the world—you .
What people think of you is none of your business
You’re not responsible for people’s thoughts. In fact, what people
think of you is none of your business. Your job is to express your
personality the best way you can while having the purest intent
possible. In short, your responsibility is to do your best to be your
true self. Then, people may or may not like you, and either way is
fine. Remember, the most influential people such as presidents and
statesmen and women are often hated by millions.
Therefore, don’t make it your personal mission to change people’s
image of you. People are entitled to their beliefs and values, and
they have the right to dislike you. They are free to interpret your
actions and behaviors through their own filter. Part of your personal
growth is to accept you don’t have to be liked by everybody, and
finally, you can be yourself.
How to use this emotion to grow
Being overly self-conscious means:

1. You have a distorted view of the way people perceive you,
and
2. You are attached to a self-image you want to protect.
To stop being so self-conscious you must address these two points.
1. Change your interpretation of the way people perceive you
To care less about what people think of you, it is essential for you to
redefine your relationships with other people. This entails realizing
that:
In general, people don’t care about you, and
You don’t care about people.
Exercise 1 - Realizing people don’t care
This exercise will help you understand at a deep level, most people
are not really concerned about you.
Choose one person you know. It might be a friend, an
acquaintance, or a colleague.
Ask yourself how often you think about that person in your
daily life.
Now, put yourself in the shoes of that person. How much do
you imagine he or she thinks about you during an average
day? How much does he or she keep track of what you do or
say? What do you think he or she is worrying about right
now?
Repeat this process with at least two more people.
As you do this exercise, you’ll probably realize other people are
simply too busy to think of you often. After all, they live with
themselves 24/7. In their own eyes, they are the most important
person in the world. Not you. And this is only to be expected.

Exercise 2 - Realizing you do not care
You’re not that concern about other people either. The following
exercise will make you realize this.
Go through your day and try to remember all the people you
met or interacted with. It might be the waitress or the
customers in the restaurant you lunched in, the people you
saw on the street, and so on.
Ask yourself how much you thought about these people prior
to this exercise. You probably didn’t think of them at all, did
you?
As you can see, you don’t really have time to worry about other
people. Most of the time you are concerned only about yourself. It’s
not to say you have no compassion or are a selfish jerk. You’re
merely being human.
Stop being overly attached to your self-image
If you are overly self-conscious, chances are you worry too much
about the way people perceive you. Perhaps you want their approval
or are afraid they will judge you. It is essential you learn to let go of
this self-image.
Exercise - Letting go of your self-image
Write down all the things you’re afraid to be judged on: Maybe
you worry about your look, or you’re afraid of saying
something silly.
Write down why you care: What is the issue here? What
image are you trying to protect? Do people believe you’re
smart and you’re afraid you can’t live up to this image? Are
you afraid of being rejected as a result of saying something
wrong?

This exercise will bring awareness to the things you’re worrying
about and will help you address them. In addition, don’t forget to
complete the exercises mentioned in the section, ‘Letting go of your
emotions.’
Finally, remember people will always interpret your words and
actions based on their values and beliefs. Therefore, to let your
personality shine, you have no choice but to allow them to see you
whatever way they wish to.

Action step
Refer to the exercises in the corresponding section of the workbook,
(Section IV. How to use your emotions to grow - Caring what people
think of you ).

24

RESENTMENT

Even if we can’t love our enemies, lest at least love
ourselves. Let’s love ourselves so much that we won’t permit
our enemies to control our happiness, our health, and our
looks.
—D

C

,H

S

W

,
S

L

.

When you resent people, you’re angry at them because they didn’t
behave the way you wanted them to. Maybe they broke their
promises, or perhaps they didn’t give you what you expected from
them. Perhaps you believed they owed you something, but they
failed to deliver?
Resentment often builds up when you fail to communicate effectively
with the people you resent. That is, when you didn’t tell them you felt
hurt, or didn’t communicate your needs and wants, assuming they
would naturally cater to them. It can also grow when you did express
your feelings but can’t let go of them and forgive. As Nelson Mandela
once said, “Resentment is like drinking poison and then hoping it will
kill your enemies .” It just doesn’t work.
Resenting people

As with any other emotion, resentment will grow in intensity following
the formula: interpretation + identification + repetition = strong
emotions.
You can resent someone for years for a rather insignificant event
based on:
Your interpretation of the event
Your identification with the story you’re telling yourself about
it, and/or
The number of times you replay the event in your mind.
Let’s say one of your friends ‘betrayed you’ by not inviting you to a
party. In your mind, your friend truly betrayed you and you deeply
resent him for it. You can’t stop thinking, “How could he do that to
me?” The thought consumes you for weeks and you decide to cut
ties with him. Months later you’re still resenting him. Notice that the
event in itself isn’t upsetting. What creates resentment is your
interpretation of the event.
Now, is it possible that your interpretation was wrong? What if your
friend assumed you wouldn’t like the party? What if he thought you
were too busy? Sure, he should have at least invited you, but
nobody is perfect. If you’d put aside your interpretation and
confronted him at the time, maybe things would have turned out
differently.
The danger of letting resentment build up
Often, what adds fuel to the fire is your inability or unwillingness to
confront the people you resent. Instead of this, you keep revisiting in
your mind what (you think) happened. As a result, your resentment
grows stronger as time passes. This is especially true if you regularly
interact with people you resent.
How to use resentment to grow

Resentment occurs when you are unable to forgive and move on
with your life. It is the result of being attached to what was in the past
instead of focusing on what could be in the future. When you
experience resentment, you are provided with an opportunity to learn
how to forgive and let go and, more importantly, how to love yourself.
Resentment is here to tell you that you must love yourself and value
your peace of mind more than anything else. Your peace of mind
must become more important than being right, taking revenge, or
hating someone else. In short, moving beyond resentment is making
a declaration of love to yourself so you can move on, while, at the
same time, showing compassion to others.
Loving yourself
Paraphrasing Nelson Mandela’s words, resentment is a poison you
consented to drink. Resentment are the weeds you allow to grow in
your garden. When you experience resentment, you believe that
something you were legitimately entitled to was unjustly taken from
you. For instance, it could be someone else’s trust, respect, or love.
As a result, you feel as though you’ve been attacked personally.
Resentment will subsist as long as your need for being
right and getting even is more important than your
peace of mind. It will keep growing as long as you keep feeding
the emotion with thoughts of resentment. And it will remain as long
as you repress it. That’s why it’s important you make your peace of
mind a priority and learn to forgive others as well as yourself.
Loving others
Your ability to release resentment is linked to your level of
compassion. The more compassionate you are, the easier it will be
to let go of resentment. One important thing to understand is that
people always act based on their level of consciousness (or
unconsciousness). You may wish someone had acted differently

toward you, but if he or she didn’t, it’s probably because he or she
was unable to do so.
Thus, rather than saying people are good or bad, it is more accurate
to say they are either conscious or unconscious. When they do
terrible things to you, it’s often because of their lack of
consciousness, or the negative emotional state they were in at the
time.
Sadly, most people are deeply conditioned. Their upbringing leads
them to act in a certain way. People often act the same way as their
parents, which is why you often hear of people who’ve been abused
by their parents, becoming, in turn, abusive with their children.
As Eckhart Tolle wrote in the Power of Now:
The mind, conditioned as it is by the past, always seeks to
re-create what it knows and is familiar with. Even if it is
painful, at least it is familiar. The mind always adheres to the
known. The unknown is dangerous because it has no control
over it. That’s why the mind dislikes and ignores the present
moment.
In short, the nature of the (unconscious) human mind is to cling to
old patterns and recreate them. Look at your family history and you’ll
probably notice these patterns. You’ll see how people are
conditioned. This shows how difficult it is for people to break free
from set patterns.
I used to resent my mother for being overly protective. I blamed her
for not encouraging me to grow, but instead, her actions made me
weaker than I already was. Perhaps, it was one of the reasons I
embarked on a personal development journey. However, I realized
she didn’t have any bad intentions. She simply meant well and did
the best she could.
The point is, people do what they can, with what they have, based
on who they are and how much they’ve been conditioned. They
make tons of mistakes as well. We all do. It’s part of being human.

One of the most ridiculous things we try to do as human beings is to
want to change the past. What happened in the past was supposed
to happen. Because it did happen. Now, the question is, what are
you going to do about it?
How to deal with resentment
To start letting go of resentment, we’ll discuss the importance of:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Changing/reevaluating your interpretation
Confronting the situation
Forgiving (breaking free from identification), and
Forgetting (stopping the repetition).

Resentment results from your interpretation of something that
happened to you. This interpretation leads you to feel betrayed and
to experience anger, or even a desire for revenge. By revisiting the
scene in your mind, you allow resentment to build and, because you
avoid confronting the situation or person at the root of your
resentment, the emotion continues to grow.
To prevent resentment from building, it is necessary for you to
reevaluate your interpretation of what happened, while confronting
the situation or person you resent. After doing this, you must be
willing to forgive and release your resentment. Finally, you must
choose to forget. This entails not replaying the scene in your mind
over and over again.
1. Changing/reevaluating your interpretation
To put things into perspective, it is important for you to look at your
interpretation of what happened. Might you have over-dramatized
the situation? Is it possible you misinterpreted something? Ask
yourself, what exactly happened? After you remove your
interpretation, only the hard facts will remain. Looking at what really

happened may provide you with valuable insights, allowing you to
replace your current interpretation with a more empowering one.
2. Confronting the situation
If your resentment is directed toward people, perhaps you need to
have an honest discussion with them and share how you feel.
Often, resentment builds up when you don’t share your feelings with
the person you resent. This is often due to fear: fear of appearing
vulnerable, fear of hurting the other person, or fear of negatively
impacting your relationship with that person. If you can’t talk to that
person directly, an alternative is to write a letter. Even if you don’t
send it, the simple act of writing the letter may help you release
some of your resentment.
3. Forgiving
Now you’ve found a channel to express yourself, you can start to
forgive. You’ve looked at the hard facts and reevaluated your
interpretation. If needed, you had an honest discussion with the
person you resent. You did what you had to do, and can now let go.
Think of the negative consequences created by resentment. Write
down how it affects your happiness and peace of mind. Remember,
resentment is the result of your attachment to the past. Forgiveness
is simply reconnecting with the only thing that is real, the present,
while forgetting about what isn’t real, the past. Then, release it.
Imagine how your life would be and how you would feel once you’ve
let go of the resentment. Do it right now. Then, let go. Forgive.
Remember, forgiving is an act of self-love. You forgive not just
because you have compassion, but because you value
your happiness more than anything else. As you forgive,
you let go of the attachment to your story, and you distance yourself
from the thoughts related to it. To let go of resentment, you can use

the five-step process introduced in the section, ‘Letting go of your
emotions.’
4. Forgetting
Finally, forget. Forgetting is when you stop entertaining thoughts of
resentment and simply move on. When such thoughts arise, let them
go. Over time they will lose their power.

Action step
Complete the exercise in the corresponding section of the workbook,
(Section IV. How to use your emotions to grow - Resentment ).

25

JEALOUSY

When you experience jealousy, you desire something someone else
has, but you don’t currently have. We all feel jealous from time to
time, and this is not something you should blame yourself for. In this
section, I will explain how jealousy works and provide you with some
solutions to deal with it.
How to use jealousy to grow
Jealousy stems from the belief you aren’t good enough. It comes
from a place of lack and scarcity. You want something someone else
has, believing that it would fulfill you. Alternatively, you’re afraid of
losing something or someone you believe is yours.
Jealousy can help you find what you really want
Jealousy can let you know you’re on the wrong path and can help
you find out what you really want. For instance, in her book Quiet,
Susan Cain explained she would often feel jealous of her friends
who were writers or psychologists. Interestingly, even though she
was a lawyer at the time, she didn’t feel jealous of successful
lawyers—as her lawyer friends often did. This led her to realize she
wasn’t made to be a lawyer. As a result, she changed her career and
became a writer.

I had a similar experience. While I was a consultant, I didn’t envy or
look up to successful people in my company. On the other hand, on
my personal development journey, I became envious of successful
personal development bloggers and YouTubers. I felt particularly
jealous of two such people when I realized they were doing exactly
what I wanted to do. I imagined how amazing it would be to help
other people and make a contribution to society while studying and
growing along the way. This is why I created a blog and started
writing books. As you can see, jealousy, when properly used, can be
beneficial.
Exercise - Identify who you are jealous of
Write down who you are jealous of. Now, what does it say about you
and what you want from life?
Jealousy can signal a scarcity mindset
In other situations, jealousy may indicate you’re operating under a
scarcity mindset. Let me give you another example from my personal
life. When I see bestselling writers, I sometimes become jealous. I
feel as though they are stealing my piece of the pie, and I deserve
success as much as they do. I’m not proud of this feeling, but I don’t
blame myself for having it, either.
This feeling of jealousy stems from the belief there is only a certain
amount of success available out there. Thus, every time someone
has a little success, they are stealing your piece of the action.
Interestingly, this is often not the case. If anything, for writers the
opposite is true. The more a writer can cooperate with other writers,
the better chances he or she has to succeed. A writer who tries to do
everything on his or her own is likely to fail. This is not limited to
writers, of course. Shifting your mindset from one of competition to
one of cooperation can help you move from a feeling of scarcity to a
feeling of abundance.
Nowadays, when I see other writers having success, I remind myself
what great news it is. After all, if they can do it, so can I. And the

more successful my fellow writers become, the more they are in the
position to help me in the future. This also works the other way
around. The more I help other writers to succeed, the more they’ll be
able to help me in the future. As Zig Ziglar said, “You can have
everything in life you want, if you will just help other people get what
they want. ” Remember, what other people can do, you can do as
well. Remember also, success is not a limited resource.
Exercise - Cooperate rather than competing
Think of a time in the past when you felt jealous of someone else’s
accomplishments. Now, ask yourself why you felt that way. Then,
ask yourself:
What would it be like to support the person?
How could I cooperate with the person?
Why is that person’s success good for me?
Jealousy may tell you to solve self-esteem issues
Perhaps you’re afraid your boyfriend or girlfriend may cheat on you,
or leave you for someone else. This usually comes from the belief
you aren’t good enough, and you need your boyfriend or girlfriend to
‘complete’ you. Unfortunately (or fortunately), the same way you
can’t control what people think of you or how they behave, you can’t
control your loved one’s thoughts or behaviors either. Often, the very
same desire to control your partner is what pushes them further
away. While feeling jealous from time to time is normal, if you’re
excessively jealous, it is essential you look within you. Your
insecurities and fears usually come from a lack of self-esteem and
from the fear that you can’t or won’t be loved.
Jealousy may lead to some of the following behaviors:
Trying to control your partner: You may check your partner’s
phone or emails or prevent them from going out to see their
friends.

Testing your partner to see whether he or she loves you: You
may expect your partner to behave in a certain way and when
he or she doesn’t, you feel betrayed. This stems from the
belief that you shouldn’t have to tell your partner what you
want or need. He or she should be able to guess.
Imagining things that aren’t there: You make up all sorts of
stories in your mind by extrapolating facts.
I invite you to refer to the section, ‘Not being good enough,’ to
discover how to develop a healthier self-esteem.
Jealousy may signal you to stop comparing yourself with
others
One kind of lingering discontent, shared by millions, is the
notion that others are happier than they are. I assure you,
they are not. If you could only see the secret sorrows of
those whose smiles and activities seem to indicate
happiness. If you could only see how fervently they wish to
be somewhere else, doing something different, being
someone other than who they are.
—V

H

,T

P

Y
S

.

Jealousy often results from comparison with others. It is important to
realize this type of comparison is generally as counterproductive as it
is biased. Indeed, you seldom compare apples to apples. You look at
some of your friends’ successes, but you fail to realize this is only
part of the picture. While they may seem happy and successful on
the surface, it is quite possible they are unhappy or even depressed.
The point is, rather than assuming your friends are happier than you
are, it is better to assume that you are as happy as they are.

Also, guard against looking only at areas in which your friends seem
to have it better than you. Perhaps, you focus on the fact they’re
making more money than you, or have a partner while you are
single. Or perhaps you envy them for some of their natural strengths
and abilities. The problem here is you fail to make an ‘apple to apple’
comparison. You dismiss your own strengths or qualities which make
you feel as though you’re not as good as they are.
Even worse, you may often compare yourself with several other
people. You look at areas in which they are successful and then you
look at your own life to see how well you compare. Of course, not
very well. How could you compete with the combined strengths of
several people! Can you see how biased and unrealistic this type of
comparison is? Yet, this is what many of us do, albeit unconsciously.
The bottom line is, if you feel jealous, it may be because you engage
in this type of unfair comparison. Instead, why not compare your
‘today’s’ self with your ‘yesterday’s’ self. After all, the only thing you
can do is to try to be better than you were yesterday, last month or
last year. Because we all start with different circumstances, skills and
personalities, there is no such thing as a fair comparison.
Exercise - Compare apples to apples
This exercise will help you compare yourself to others more fairly.
Select someone you often compare yourself with. Write down all the
things you’re doing better than that person.

Action step
Refer to the exercises in the corresponding section of the workbook,
(Section IV. How to use your emotions to grow - Jealousy ).

26

DEPRESSION

The hardest thing about depression is that it is addictive. It
begins to feel uncomfortable not to be depressed. You feel
guilty for feeling happy.
—P

W

,

.

Non-clinical depression occurs when you’re not where you want to
be in life, you have lost any hope to ever be, and can’t accept it. This
might happen after a tragic event in your life or more progressively
as some aspects of your life slowly fall apart. Depression results
from feeling hopeless in one or several areas of your life. Here are
some examples:
You lost your job and have no hope of finding a new one to
match your expectations.
You’re sick and have no hope to recover as well as you would
like to.
You are divorced from your partner and can only see your
kids once in a while.
You have little hope of finding a suitable partner.
You’re in so much debt that it seems as though you’ll never
get out of it.
You suffered a bereavement.

While the events above are tragic, depression can also be created
out of more ‘ordinary,’ less severe events. For instance, some people
may spend so much time dwelling on the past or worrying about the
future they eventually become depressed. This may happen even
though no significant events have occurred in their lives.
It is essential to remind yourself that depression, like other emotional
states, is neither good nor bad, it just is. You are not your
depression. You existed before it, you exist during it and, all things
being equal, you will exist after it.
Depression is an active process
While it may seem as though depression is happening to you, it is, in
fact, created by the negative thoughts you identified with. Thus, you
do have some responsibility in creating your depression. Does it
mean you should feel guilty or beat yourself up for being depressed?
Of course, not! Never. In fact, you should never beat yourself up for
any of the emotions you feel. That would be pointless. What it
means, however, is that, because you’ve played a part in creating
your current emotional state, you also have the power to get out of it.
And that’s great news, right?
Remember Dr. David K. Reynolds’ first-hand experience with
depression? He wrote the following:
Depression can be created by sitting slouched in a chair,
shoulders hunched, head hanging down. Repeat these
words over and over: ‘There’s nothing anybody can do. No
one can help. It’s hopeless. I’m helpless. I give up.’ Shake
your head, sigh, cry. In general, act depressed and the
genuine feeling will follow in time.
—D

K. R

,C

L

.

David K. Reynolds’ depression was entirely self-created. It was an
active process that involved adopting a certain body language,

repeating certain words, and having certain thoughts. He had to act
in a certain way to become depressed.
The good news is that because you have the power to ‘create’
depression, you also have the power to climb out of it. However, in a
negative state such as depression, ignoring negative thoughts and
replacing them with more positive ones can be extremely
challenging. Even if you try to think positive thoughts of gratitude,
joy, or happiness, at first, they will seem to have no power.
But you may experience other negative emotions such as anger for
instance. You may ignore your anger at first. Your friends may even
encourage you to do so—they would rather see you quiet and
depressed, than angry. However, sometimes anger may help you
move up the emotional ladder and overcome depression. Keep in
mind, any emotions other than depression can help and learn to
embrace whatever emotional state seems to give you more energy,
and therefore provide more power to move up the emotional ladder.
David K. Reynolds also suggests that feelings fluctuate over time
even with depressed people. He wrote, “In the deepest depression
there are ripples and waves of somewhat lighter moods. ” You can
use moments when you feel slightly better to take whatever action
may be beneficial to you at that time.
How to use depression to grow
Depression is a sign you’ve lost touch with reality. Have you noticed
that human beings are one of the few species on earth that have the
ability to become depressed? This is because they are the only ones
who can get lost in their mind and become enslaved by negative
thoughts and disempowering stories.
Depression is a sign that you need to move away from your mind—
by letting go of your worries about the past/future or your
interpretation of the present situation—and reconnect to the present
moment. It can be a powerful invitation to let go of the identity you’ve
been clinging to for so many years. This identity is what led you to
believe you should be doing certain things, making a certain amount

of money, adopting a certain lifestyle, or developing a certain social
status.
Depression invites you to reconnect with your body and emotions
while getting out of your head. After all, didn’t your mind create the
depression in the first place? Some people who experience severe
grief, sadness, or depression like to keep themselves busy to avoid
thinking. When depressed, more thinking is seldom the solution. You
rarely see people getting out of depression by using their mind.
Therefore, instead of thinking, you want to reconnect with your body.
Exercising is a great way to do this and has been shown to be
effective in improving your mood. (For additional information refer to
the section “The benefits of exercising”)
In some rare cases, severe depression can lead people to separate
from their mind. When this happens, their story suddenly drops.
Apparently, this is what happened to Eckhart Tolle as he recalls in
his book, The Power of Now. He had a sudden awakening and his
mind stopped. Here is what he wrote about his experience:
This withdrawal must have been so complete that this false,
suffering self immediately collapsed, just as if a plug had
been pulled out of an inflatable toy.
—E

T

.

In summary, depression tells you to let go of your ego and reconnect
with reality. It invites you to get out of your mind, which can only
recall the past or anticipate the future, and live more in the present.
Severe depression may require the help of a professional, but for
milder depression here are some mediating strategies:
Exercise - Reconnect with your body and your emotions
To overcome depression, it is essential for you to escape your mind.
It’s easier to ‘feel’ your way out of depression than to ‘think’ your way
out of it. I would venture to say that most people spend over ninety

percent of their lives in their mind. They have only rare moments of
lucidity when they are fully aware and present. For instance, they
don’t listen to people, but they:
Judge and interpret what they say
Anticipate what they’ll say next, and/or
Get lost in their thoughts.
All these things happen at the ‘mind’ level and show how people are
not fully present. Because they either live in the past or in the future
(i.e. in their mind), they experience a number of negative emotions.
Below are some of the things you can do to reconnect with your
body and your emotions:
Exercise: As previously discussed, exercising is a great way to
calm your mind and connect with your body, and it has a positive
effect on your mood.
Meditate: Meditation is an effective way to observe your mind and
stop identifying with your thoughts so heavily. Meditation is simply a
tool to help you reconnect with reality by observing thoughts,
emotions, and sensations instead of getting lost in your mind.
Activity: Getting busy allows you to avoid excessive thinking.
Instead of feeding your depression with constant negative thoughts,
concentrate your attention on something else.
Focus on others: As mentioned in Dale Carnegie’s book, How to
Stop Worrying and Start Living, Alfred Adler used to say to his
melancholia patients, “You can be cured in fourteen days if you
follow this prescription. Try to think every day how you can please
someone. ” Whether or not it is accurate, focusing on others can
certainly help you forget about your own issues and focus on
something more positive.
Unfortunately, when you feel depressed you won’t want to do any of
these things. However, as you start moving and start keeping
yourself busy, your situation will gradually improve, and it will

become easier and easier. Thus, it is important to take things just
one step at a time.

Action step
Refer to the exercises in the corresponding section of the workbook,
(Section IV. How to use your emotions to grow - Depression ).

27

FEAR/DISCOMFORT

Life always begins with one step outside of your comfort
zone.
—S

L. A

,

.

Whenever we try something new, we experience anxiety. We are
afraid of the unknown. This is why we like to maintain our daily
routine and stay within our comfort zones. From our brain’s point of
view, this makes perfect sense. If our current habits allow us to be
safe and avoid any potential threat to our survival (or the survival of
our ego) why bother changing them? This explains why we often
keep the same routine, or have the same thoughts over and over. It
is also why we may experience a lot of internal resistance when
trying to change ourselves.
Thus, when we try to move beyond our comfort zones, we
experience fear and distress. Now, do we want to stay in the same
place most of our lives and avoid taking any risks, or do we want to
pursue our dreams and see what we are truly capable of becoming?
We have to remember, most of our fears are a threat only to our ego,
not to our survival. Generally, they aren’t physical threats, but
imaginary ones. If we play it safe we risk missing out on life, and we
may regret it later.
Below are common fears you may experience:

Fear of rejection: You’re afraid of being rejected. This may be
physical rejection from a specific group, but it is generally more
subtle. For instance, you may be afraid of:
Making a comment people could disapprove of
Asking someone out and being turned down, or
Sharing your work and being criticized for it.
Fear of failure: You’re afraid of failing. This usually comes from
the deepest fear of not being good enough, i.e. you are afraid of
being ridiculed and believe that failure will erode your self-esteem.
Fear of loss: Human beings have an aversion to loss, which is
why we are often more motivated to prevent a loss than to secure a
gain.
Fear of disturbing: You’re afraid of disturbing people. Perhaps
due to the belief you’re not important enough. As a result, you may
feel reluctant to affirm yourself for fear of appearing selfish.
Fear of success: You’re afraid of success. You may worry you
won’t be able to sustain it with all the added pressure on your
shoulders.
How to use fear to grow
The fear of doing something new is often a sign you should go
ahead and do it anyway. This indicates a great opportunity for
personal growth. Fear, as with any other emotion, only exists in your
mind. This is why we often realize what a fool we’ve been after we’ve
completed something we were initially wary of starting.
People who end up reaching their wildest goals often do so because
they are willing to leave their comfort zone. Over time, they learn to
be comfortable with the uncomfortable. Picture one thing you were
once afraid to do, that is now no big deal for you. For instance, I bet

you were scared the first time you drove, or on your first day at work.
Now, didn’t you get used to it?
The truth is, people have the formidable ability to learn. The key is to
grow accustomed to experiencing discomfort once in a while. By not
facing your fears on a regular basis, you will greatly limit your
potential for development. Staying inside your comfort zone can also
erode your sense of self-esteem as, in the back of your mind, you
know you’re not doing what you’re supposed to do.
There is a law in nature: things either grow or die. The same goes for
humans beings. When humans don’t move beyond their comfort
zone, they start dying inside. Don’t let that happen to you. As
Benjamin Franklin said, “Some people die at twenty-five and aren’t
buried until seventy-five. ” Make sure ‘some people’ doesn’t include
you !
Taking action
The first step to move out of your comfort zone is to realize even the
most successful people on earth feel fear. Courage is not the
absence of fear, it is taking action despite the fear. Courage is
realizing fear is not going to go away and doing what you want to do
anyway. Without fear, there is no courage. As you face fear
on a regular basis, you cultivate courage and turn it into a habit.
You don’t need to avoid fear or numb yourself to it before you can
take action. Instead, you must accept the fact that fear won’t go
away and get used to it. Then, you must decide to take action.
Exercise - Move out of your comfort zone
To start moving out of your comfort zone, you can ask yourself,
“What is the one thing I should be doing, but fear has made me
procrastinate over?” Once you do that one thing, you’ll likely
experience a sense of pride and of being alive. This is a sign you’re
on the right track. See it as the reward your brain gives you for
moving beyond your comfort zone.

Action step
Refer to the exercises in the corresponding section of the workbook,
(Section IV. How to use your emotions to grow - Fear/Discomfort ).

28

PROCRASTINATION

Only put off until tomorrow what you are willing to die having
left undone.
—P

P

Procrastination is largely an emotional issue. While there are
effective techniques to deal with procrastination, for the most part,
learning to manage your emotions properly is the key to overcoming
your tendency towards delayed action.
Why you procrastinate
There are different reasons why people procrastinate. Below are
some of them:
The task is boring
The task is seen as unimportant
The task is too challenging (or perceived as such)
You’re afraid you’ll do a poor job, and/or
You are habitually lazy.
Imagine if the task was lots of fun, perceived as important, and so
easy you couldn’t fail, would you procrastinate?

I believe fear is the main reason people procrastinate. Afraid they’ll
do a poor job, people would rather put off a task. While they may
convince themselves that the task is not urgent or important, or that
they are tired, often, the truth is they are scared.
Note that procrastination isn’t in itself a sign you are lazy, or
something is wrong with you. We all procrastinate. However, if you
regularly suffer from procrastination, it may indicate you either have
self-esteem issues, or you lack self-discipline.
How to use procrastination to grow
Procrastination might suggest you believe too much in what your
mind is telling you. Instead of being the master of your mind, you’ve
become its slave. This comes at the cost of:
not living the life you want
not accomplishing your dreams, and
experiencing low self-esteem, guilt and unhappiness.
Remember, when your mind tells you, “You’re tired. Let’s rest,” or
“Let’s do it tomorrow,” it’s not an order. You don’t have to follow it.
You aren’t your emotions. Neither are you your mind. No matter what
thought may cross your mind, you can choose to either accept it, or
ignore it.
Now I would like to share a 16-step process to overcome
procrastination. Don’t worry, it’s not as complicated as it might first
appear.
How to Crush Procrastination in 16 Simple Steps

1. Understand what’s hidden behind procrastination.

The first step is to understand why you procrastinate. As we’ve
discussed previously, there are specific reasons behind
procrastination. Usually, it has to do with fear, and the mind tells you
the best way to avoid fear is simply to do nothing. In other words, to
procrastinate. Another reason you procrastinate is because the task
is difficult. You want to avoid pain as much as possible and maximize
pleasure. This is how your brain works. You may also procrastinate
because you lack motivation. This happens when the task you work
on isn’t part of a bigger vision that excites you. If you lack motivation,
ask yourself why. Then, consider the following solutions:
Delegate the task
Eliminate the task
Reframe the way you perceive the task to make it part of a
bigger (and more exciting) vision
Restructure the task so that it becomes easier, and/or
Just get started (see step 13).
Spend time identifying all the reasons behind your procrastination.
Be honest with yourself.
2. Remind yourself of the cost of procrastination
Procrastination is not a minor issue and comes with severe
consequences.
The direct consequence of procrastination is that you’ll
achieve far less than you could during your time spent on
earth.
The indirect consequence of procrastination is that you may
feel bad about yourself. You may blame yourself for not doing
what you know you should be doing, which erodes your selfesteem and creates unnecessary worries.
Exercise - the cost of procrastination

Now, take a sheet of paper and write down what procrastination
costs you.
How does it affect your peace of mind? Your self-esteem? Your
ability to achieve your dreams? The more you’re sick and tired of
procrastination, the more likely you will be to actually do something
about it.
3. Uncover your story
The third step to overcome procrastination is to identify the story
behind it. What are you telling yourself when you feel the urge to
procrastinate? What thoughts cross your mind? What excuses do
you use? Some common excuses are:
I’m too tired
I’ll do it tomorrow
I’ll do a poor job, and/or
It’s not really important.
Let’s address some of these excuses right away
I’m too tired
While that may be true, you must realize you’re not your mind. You
don’t need to listen to your mind. Navy SEAL, David Goggins, uses
the forty percent rule. This rule states that, even when you think you
can’t take it anymore, you’re using only forty percent of your brain’s
capacity. The bottom line is you have great reserves of energy you
can tap into when you feel tired. Therefore, working two hours on
your side business after work isn’t going to kill you.
I’ll do a poor job
If you schedule a task for today, it means you believe you can do it.
Thus, the fear of doing a poor job isn’t the issue here. After all, if you
think you’ll do a poor job today, what makes you think you’ll do a

better job tomorrow? You most likely won’t. That’s just a story you’re
telling yourself.
I’ll do it tomorrow
Doing it tomorrow might not be a big deal. However, if you can’t
discipline yourself to finish today’s tasks, what are the chances you
will design your ideal life in the future? Remember, disciplining
yourself to complete the task in front of you is, ultimately, what will
allow you to create your future life. Time, effort, and self-discipline
are required to create anything of value in your life.
It’s not really important
Even if that is true, not completing a task you scheduled creates an
open loop. Then, somewhere in the back of your mind you know that
you still have to complete that task. If you keep putting off tasks,
you’ll soon start losing motivation. At some point, you may even end
up feeling stuck without knowing why.
Exercise - Write down your excuses
Start becoming aware of all the excuses you come up with. Write
them down, then, address them one by one. They control you
because you let them to. Commit to addressing them.
4. Rewrite your story
Look at your excuses. Are you too tired? Do you lack time? Are you
trying to do everything perfectly? Now you’ve identified your story,
create a new more empowering story to neutralize your old excuses.
See the examples below:
I don’t have time for that → I find and make time for whatever
I’m committed to.
I’m too tired → I have control over my mind and I have more
energy than I imagine. When I schedule a task, I complete it.

Then, create affirmations or mantras around your new story. Repeat
them to yourself every morning and throughout the day until they
become part of your identity. Remember, procrastination is a habit.
You want to reprogram your mind and implement a new habit: the
habit of working on the tasks you schedule whether you feel like it or
not. (For more, refer to the section, ‘Conditioning your mind.’)
5. Clarify your ‘why’
Procrastination is often due to a lack of motivation. When you’re
excited about a goal, you don’t run away from it, do you? No. You
can’t wait to work on it!
Look at the tasks you regularly procrastinate over. Why is that? How
can you make these tasks part of your vision to make you feel more
motivated? Can you adjust these tasks? Can you learn something
from these tasks? Can you envision yourself feeling proud of
yourself as you complete these tasks?
The stronger your reason, your ‘why,’ the easier it will be for you to
overcome your tendency to procrastinate.
6. Identify the ways you distract yourself
The next step is to notice all the ways you distract yourself. What are
your own ways to procrastinate? Is it going for a walk? Watching
videos on YouTube? Drinking coffee? Or perhaps, reading books on
how to overcome procrastination?
Unless you’re aware of all the ways procrastination manifests in your
life, you’ll have a hard time overcoming it.
Exercise - make a list of all the ways you procrastinate
Take a couple of minutes to write down all the way you procrastinate
using the free workbook.

7. Stay with the urge
As you feel the urge to *insert your distraction here*, stay with the
emotion. How do you feel? Allow yourself to feel the emotion. Don’t
judge yourself. Don’t blame yourself. Just accept what is. As you do
so, you’ll gain more control of your mind, (refer to the chapter on
‘Letting go of your emotions,’ for more information)
8. Record everything you do
To assess your productivity and gather insights on ways you
procrastinate, record everything you do in a notebook. Do it for one
week. Each time you switch from one activity to another, write it
down. Make sure you write how much time you spend on each task.
By the end of the week, you’ll know how much time you spend doing
‘real’ work and how much time you spend distracting yourself. Be
careful, you might be shocked.
9. Set a clear intent behind everything you do
Before working on a task, make sure you know exactly what needs
to be done. Ask yourself, what am I trying to accomplish here? What
will the end result look like? This way, you’ll avoid giving your mind
room to create excuses.
10. Prepare your environment
Your mind doesn’t like what’s difficult. It wants things to be easy.
Thus, make sure you remove any friction or obstacle so you can
work on your task immediately. For instance:
If you want to run, have your running gear ready next to your
bed so you can go run right after you wake up, (after a full
warm-up first, of course).

For computer-related tasks, remove all distractions from your
desk and make sure you can access all the files you need
immediately.
11. Start small
Instead of putting a lot of pressure on yourself, why not start small?
Rather than writing two pages of your manuscript, maybe you can
write one paragraph. Rather than exercising for one hour, why not
start with five minutes? Making your tasks smaller will help you
overcome procrastination. Not only that, but it will also allow you to
build momentum. So, whenever you have an option, make sure you
start small to reduce the pressure.
12. Create quick wins
Facing daunting tasks every day will set you up for failure and kill
your motivation. Learn to chunk down your tasks and set small
milestones, ones you can achieve easily. This will:
Allow you to form the habit of completing your tasks one
hundred percent
Increase your self-esteem as you accumulate quick wins, and
Reduce the urge you have to procrastinate.
Set small goals every day and accomplish them consistently for a
few weeks. By doing so, you will increase your self-esteem and be
better equipped to complete challenging tasks in the future.
Remember, getting things done is a habit, and as with any other
habit, it can be practiced and learned.
13. Just get started
Often, when you start working on a task, you’ll enter what is called
‘the flow’ and things become effortless. In these instances, you

become so focused on your task motivation will no longer be an
issue.
The best way to enter a ‘flow state’ is by getting started. To make it
easier, decide to work on a task for only five minutes and see what
happens. Remove any pressure or desire to perform well and give
yourself permission to do a poor job. You’ll often end up working on
the task for a lot longer than originally planned. Notice that the more
attention your task requires, the more likely you are to enter the flow
quickly.
In addition, you can use the 5-Second Rule introduced by Mel
Robbins in her book, The 5 Second Rule . This rule states that you
only have a 5-second window to take action before your mind talks
you out of it. (For more on the 5 Second Rule, refer to the section,
‘Conditioning your mind.’)
14. Create daily habits to support you
If you tend to procrastinate on important tasks, commit to working on
them first thing in the morning. For instance, if you want to write a
book, start writing every morning. Start small. For instance, set a tiny
goal of writing fifty words a day, and do it every morning. As you
maintain this schedule, you’ll develop a writing habit and make
procrastination less likely.
15. Use visualization
You can also use visualization to help you overcome procrastination.
Below are two specific ways to do so:
1. Visualize yourself doing the task: See yourself turning on the
computer, opening the file and writing. Imagine yourself
putting on your running shoes and going for a run. This type
of visualization has been shown to increase the likelihood you
work on the task. Try it out.

2. Visualize yourself having completed the task: How would you
feel once the task is done? Liberated? Happy? Proud? Now,
feel as you would feel if you had completed your task. By
doing so, you’ll experience a boost of motivation that will
encourage you to work on your task.
16. Build accountability
If you have a hard time completing a task, you might need some
accountability. When I’m likely to procrastinate, I like to send a
message to a friend and tell him I will complete a certain task by a
specific date.
Another way to build accountability is to have an accountability
partner you communicate with on a regular basis. You could talk to
him or her once a week and share your list of goals. You could look
at the important tasks you’ll likely to put off and set a specific
deadline for each one. Then, you could send an email to your
accountability partner to let him or her know when you completed a
task.
If you follow this 16-step process, you should be able to overcome
or, at least, significantly reduce your tendency to procrastinate.

Action step
Follow the 16-step process using the corresponding section of the
workbook, (Section IV. How to use your emotions to grow Procrastination ).

29

LACK OF MOTIVATION

People often say that motivation doesn’t last. Well, neither
does bathing – that’s why we recommend it daily.
—Z

Z

,
.

Lacking motivation is usually a sign that you don’t have a compelling
vision to pursue. People who have an exciting vision seldom lack
motivation. While they may experience setbacks along the way and
feel frustrated or even mildly depressed, they tend to bounce back
quickly by reminding themselves of their vision.
Lack of motivation is also a sign you’re not ‘following your bliss.’ It
shows there is a misalignment between what you do and who you
are. The word ‘enthusiastic’ comes from Greek and means, ‘filled
with the divine.’ If you lack enthusiasm, you’re probably out of touch
with the essence of who you are.
I’ve never heard of a noble prize winner retiring early because he or
she was bored. In fact, most of them will work until the day they die.
This is because they have a clear purpose. Similarly, I’ve never seen
billionaires selling their companies to retire on a tropical island. They
may have tried but quickly realize how boring their lives have
become.

The point is, you don’t inherently lack motivation, you’re just not
doing what you’re supposed to do. You haven’t stretched yourself
enough and haven’t created a vision that inspires you. Perhaps,
you’re stuck at the same dead-end job that bores you to tears. Or
maybe you’re at your current job for the money, or to fulfill your
parents’ wishes. Then, it’s no wonder you lack motivation.
Fortunately, you can get your motivation back.
How to use motivation (or lack thereof) to grow
A lack of motivation says you need to design a life that is more in line
with who you are. It entails having a deep knowledge of your
strengths, personality, and preferences, while making sure you
leverage them on a day-to-day basis.
Knowing your strengths
When you spend most of your day doing things you suck at, how do
you feel? Probably, not very motivated. Sadly, many people are stuck
in jobs that do not allow them to use their strengths. As a result, they
keep struggling, and keep wondering if their fate is to suffer the
same way for the next forty years. I’ve experienced first-hand the
difference between working at a job you suck at, and working on
something you love and feel good at. I can attest that the level of
motivation and energy you have when you do what feels right to you
can be extraordinary.
Have you noticed you tend to like the things you’re good at? You
may not necessarily enjoy the task in itself but receiving positive
feedback gives you a sense of pride and make you feel good about
yourself. Now, if you were constantly reminded what a poor job
you’re doing, would you still love that same task?
The point is, there are things you are good at as well as things you
enjoy doing. Once you identify the tasks you’re good at and spend
as much time as you can on them, you’ll feel more motivated. You

may even find yourself enjoying tasks you would never have
imagined simply because you’re good at them.
To be able to focus on your strengths you may have to redesign your
current job description, change jobs within the same company, or
change your career altogether. Remember, if every second of the
day is a struggle, you’re probably not doing what you’re supposed to
do. You have strengths and your job is to find them.
Knowing your personality
This is somewhat related to the previous point since your personality
partially determines what you’re good at. For instance, if you’re an
introvert, you’re likely to take different career choices than if you
were an extrovert. You may prefer spending most of your time alone
or in small groups and may stay away from jobs that require you to
interact with clients all day long. You may find yourself performing
better in a quiet environment.
Your core values will also affect your level of motivation. Perhaps,
independence is vital for you. If so, being self-employed might be a
better idea than having a 9-to-5 job. Or maybe you like novelty and
want to be learning constantly. If so, doing the same repetitive job
might not bring you much satisfaction.
Knowing what motivates you
Sometimes you lack motivation because you set a goal in a way that
doesn’t inspire you. While the goal may be something you genuinely
want, the way you frame it, or work on it is just not motivating you.
Let’s say you want to lose weight. If none of the reasons behind your
goal touch you at an emotional level, you won’t feel motivated, and
will have a hard time achieving your goal. Thus, your job is to find
out what losing weight will do for you. Ask yourself why you want to
lose weight. Keep asking yourself why until you find something that
resonates with you at an emotional level. Remember, you seldom

want to lose weight because it’s the ‘right thing’ to do. You want to
lose weight because it will make you feel a certain way. This is the
meaning you give to losing weight, and you must get it right if you
want to succeed.
Now, you can also ask yourself why you don’t want to lose weight. It
may help you uncover the reasons why you’re struggling losing
weight. If you overeat because it makes you feel good, you need to
ask why is that? Is it a habit? Is it because you’re stressed? Is it
because of your environment? Is it a way to escape from something?
Knowing why you’re doing something is important. Once you have a
strong why, who knows what you can accomplish?
Motivation comes and goes
Here, it is worth mentioning you don’t need to be motivated all the
time. Motivation comes and goes. There is no need to beat yourself
up when you feel uninspired. To help you take action when you lack
motivation it is important to:
Have a system that allows you to stay on track with your
goals
Build the self-discipline needed to do things when you don’t
feel like it, and
Have self-compassion and love yourself instead of blaming
yourself for everything that goes wrong in your life.
Putting a system in place means having a daily routine that allows
you to move toward your goal. For instance, it could be working on a
task for a certain amount of time first thing in the morning. Sticking to
that ritual every day is one way to build self-discipline. Another way
is to set small goals every day and achieve them consistently.
Having self-compassion means encouraging yourself instead of
beating yourself up.

To learn more about how to create a morning ritual, you can refer to
my book, Wake Up Call: How to Take Control of Your Morning and
Transform Your Life.
Feeling stuck
Sometimes, you feel stuck. You’re not motivated to do anything, or
you feel overwhelmed and don’t necessarily know why. This often
results from either having too many open loops in your life, or from
procrastinating on a major task. Let’s see what you can do to unstick
yourself.
A simple 3-step process to unstuck yourself
Whenever you feel stuck try the following 3-step process:
1. Make a list of all the tasks that need to be done.
2. Identify one task you’ve been putting off.
3. Complete that task.
There is often one specific task you’ve been putting off for a while.
While this may not necessarily be a difficult task, once you commit
and finally complete it, you feel so good you may end up completing
many more tasks. As a result, you will start building momentum and
allow yourself to get unstuck. If you cannot work on that one specific
task, start with a less daunting one. This will also help you build
momentum.
Closing open loops
If you’ve been putting off too many tasks or have too many
unfinished projects, you can do the following:
1. Make a list of all the tasks or project you want to complete.

2. Set aside a specific time to complete them. Perhaps, just a
few hours could allow you to finish many of these tasks. Or
maybe you need longer. If so, take more time.
3. For bigger projects, in the next few days or weeks, focus on
only one project until it is complete.
4. Reschedule, delegate or abandon some of your projects.
To learn how to get your motivation back, you can refer to the
second book in the Mastery Series, Master Your Motivation by
clicking here .

Action step
Refer to the exercises in the corresponding section of the workbook.
(Section IV. How to use your emotions to grow - Lack of motivation ).

CONCLUSION

Thank you for purchasing this book. My sincere hope is that it helped
you make sense of your emotions and gave you the tools you need
to start taking better control of them. Remember, the quality of your
emotions determines the quality of your life. Therefore, learning how
to change yourself and your environment to experience more
positive emotions is essential for your wellbeing.
Let’s face it. You’ll keep experiencing negative emotions throughout
your life, but, hopefully, each time you’ll remind yourself that your
emotions are not you and will learn to accept them as they are
before letting them go. You’re not sad, depressed, jealous or angry,
you are what witnesses these emotions. You are what remains after
these temporary feelings fade away.
Your emotions are here to guide you. Learn as much as you can
from them, and then let them go. Don’t cling to them as if your
existence depends on them. It doesn’t. Don’t identify with them as
though they define you. They don’t. Instead, use your emotions to
grow and remember, you are beyond emotions. How could you not
be? They come and go, but you stay. Always.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

THIBAUT MEURISSE

Thibaut Meurisse is an author, coach, and founder of whatispersonaldevelopment.org.

He has been featured on major personal development websites such as Lifehack,
TinyBuddha, MotivationGrid, PickTheBrain, DumbLittleMan or FinerMinds.
Obsessed with self-improvement and fascinated by the power of the brain, his
personal mission is to help people realize their full potential and reach higher
levels of fulfillment and consciousness.
You can connect with him on his Facebook page
https://www.facebook.com/whatispersonaldevelopment.org
Learn more about Thibaut at
amazon.com/author/thibautmeurisse

Bibliography
A Million Thoughts, Learn all about meditation from the Himalayan
mystic , Om Swami
Ask and It is Given: Learning to Manifest Your Desires, Esther Hicks
and Jerry Hicks
Awareness, Anthony de Mello
Breaking the Chain of Low Self-Esteem, Marilyn Sorensen and
Barrie Zwicker
Breathwalk: Breathing Your Way to a Revitalized Body, Mind and
Spirit, Gurucharan Singh Khalsa and Yogi Bhajan
Constructive living, David K. Reynolds
How to Stop Worrying and Start Living, Dale Carnegie
Radical Honesty: How to Transform Your Life by Telling the Truth,
Brad Blanton
The Power of Now: A Guide to Spiritual Enlightenment, Eckhart Tolle
The Power of Your Supermind, Vernon Howard
The 15 Commitments of Conscious Leadership: A New Paradigm for
Sustainable Success, Jim Dethmer and Diana Chapman
The Sedona Method, Hale Dwoskin and Jack Canfield
The Six Pillars of Self-Esteem, Nathaniel Branden

