Why Has
Nobody
Told Me
This
Before?
DR JULIE SMITH

WRITE-ON PAGES
Any references to ‘writing in this book’ refer to the original printed version.
Readers should write on a separate piece of paper in these instances.

Contents
Introduction

1: On Dark Places
1: Understanding low mood
2: Mood pitfalls to watch out for
3: Things that help
4: How to turn bad days into be er days
5: How to get the basics right
2: On Motivation
6: Understanding motivation
7: How to nurture that motivation feeling
8: How do you make yourself do something when you don’t
feel like it?
9: Big life changes. Where do I start?
3: On Emotional Pain
10: Make it all go away!
11: What to do with emotions
12: How to harness the power of your words
13: How to support someone
4: On Grief

14:
15:
16:
17:

Understanding grief
The stages of grief
The tasks of mourning
The pillars of strength

5: On Self-doubt
18: Dealing with criticism and disapproval
19: The key to building conﬁdence
20: You are not your mistakes
21: Being enough
6: On Fear
22: Make anxiety disappear!
23: Things we do that make anxiety worse
24: How to calm anxiety right now
25: What to do with anxious thoughts
26: Fear of the inevitable
7: On Stress
27: Is stress di erent from anxiety?
28: Why reducing stress is not the only answer
29: When good stress goes bad
30: Making stress work for you
31: Coping when it counts
8: On a Meaningful Life
32: The problem with ‘I just want to be happy’
33: Working out what ma ers

34: How to create a life with meaning
35: Relationships
36: When to seek help
References
Resources
Acknowledgements
Spare tools
Index

About the Author
DR JULIE SMITH has over ten years’ experience as a clinical
psychologist and was the ﬁrst professional to use TikTok to give insights
on therapy. A er running her own private practice, Julie launched her
TikTok channel with the mission of making top-quality mental health
education accessible to all. During the COVID-19 pandemic, her
audience grew astronomically to 3 million followers as users related to
the bite-sized self-help videos she was sharing and put her advice into
practice. Those videos have clocked up around half a billion views
across her platforms. She was named by TikTok as one of its Top 100
creators.
Julie has appeared in two BBC ﬁlms as well as on CBBC, Good Morning
Britain, BBC Breakfast and CNN International. She is the BBC Radio 1
Life Hacks psychologist and has been featured by Women’s Health,
Buzzfeed, the Telegraph, The Times, the Mail on Sunday, Glamour, CNN
and more. Julie lives in Hampshire, England, with her husband and three
children.
Dr Julie Smith, BSc (Hons), D. Clin. Psych., C.Psychol. Chartered Clinical
Psychologist. Registered with the HCPC and BPS.
@drjuliesmith
@drjulie
@drjulie

For Ma hew.
If mine is the ink then yours is the paper. Like all
our adventures we got here together.

Introduction
I’m si ing in my therapy room across from a young woman. She is
relaxed in the chair, her arms open and loosely moving as she speaks to
me. A transformation from the tension and nerves of her ﬁrst session.
We have only had a dozen appointments. She looks into my eyes and
starts to nod and smile as she says, ‘You know what? I know it’s going to
be hard, but I know I can do it.’
My eyes sting and I swallow. The smile sweeps across every muscle in
my face. She has felt the shi and, now, so have I. She came into this
room, some time ago, fearful of the world and everything she had to
face. Pervasive self-doubt led her to feel dread for every new change
and challenge. She le therapy that day with her head held a li le
higher. Not because of me. I have no magical ability to heal anyone or
change their life. She had not needed years of therapy that unravelled
her childhood. In this situation, as in many others, the major part of my
role was as an educator. I passed on insights about what the science
says and what has worked for others. Once she understood and started
using the concepts and skills, a transformation began. She felt hope for
the future. She started to believe in her own strength. She started
dealing with di cult situations in healthy new ways. Each time she did,
conﬁdence in her ability to cope grew a bit more.
As we revisited the things she needed to remember in order to face
the week ahead, she nodded, looked at me and asked, ‘Why has
nobody told me this before?’
Those words stayed with me, ringing in my head. She was not the
ﬁrst or the last person to say them. The same scenario repeated itself
over and over. Individuals were coming along to therapy believing that
their strong painful emotions were the result of a fault in their brain or

personality. They did not believe they had any power to inﬂuence
them. While longer-term, more in-depth therapy is appropriate for
some people, there were so many who simply needed some education
about how their mind and body work and how they could manage their
mental health day-to-day.
I knew the catalyst was not me, it was the knowledge they were
being introduced to. But people should not have to pay to come and
see someone like me just to get access to that education about how
their mind works. Sure, the information is out there. But in a sea of
misinformation, you have to know what you are looking for.
I started campaigning into my poor husband’s ear about how things
should be di erent. ‘OK, go for it,’ he said. ‘Put some videos on
YouTube or something.’
So we did. Together we started making videos talking about mental
health. As it turned out, I was not the only one who wanted to talk
about this stu . Before I knew it, I was making almost daily videos for
millions of followers across social media. But the platforms where I
could reach the most people seemed to be those with short-form
videos. This means I have a large collection of videos with no longer
than 60 seconds to get my point across.
While I have been able to catch people’s a ention, share some
insights and get them talking about mental health, I still want to go one
step further. When you make a 60-second video there is so much that
you have to leave out. So much detail that gets missed. So, here it is.
The detail. The ins and outs of how I might explain some of these
concepts in a therapy session and some simple guidance on how to use
them, step by step.
The tools in this book are mostly taught in therapy, but they are not
therapy skills. They are life skills. Tools that can help every single one of
us to navigate through di cult times and to ﬂourish.
In this book, I will break down the things I have learned as a
psychologist and gather together all of the most valuable knowledge,
wisdom and practical techniques I have come across that have changed
my life and those of the people I have worked with. This is the place to

get clarity on emotional experience and a clear idea of what to do
about it.
When we understand a li le about how our minds work and we have
some guideposts on how to deal with our emotions in a healthy way,
we not only build resilience, but we can thrive and, over time, ﬁnd a
sense of growth.
Before leaving their ﬁrst therapy session, many people want some
sort of tool they can take home and start using to ease their distress.
For this reason, this book is not about delving into your childhood and
working out how or why you came to struggle. There are other great
books for that. But, in therapy, before we can expect anyone to work
on healing any past traumas, we must ensure they have the tools in
place to build resilience and the ability to tolerate distressing emotions
safely. There is such power in understanding the many ways you can
inﬂuence how you feel and nurture good mental health.
This book is all about doing just that.
This book is not therapy, in the same way that a book about how to
maximize your physical health is not medicine. It is a toolbox ﬁlled to
the brim with di erent tools for di erent jobs. You cannot master how
to use them all at the same time, so you don’t need to try. Pick the
section that ﬁts with the challenges you face right now, and spend time
applying those ideas. Every skill takes time to become e ective, so give
it a chance and plenty of repetition before you discard any of the tools.
You cannot build a house with just one tool. Each task requires
something slightly di erent. And however skilled you get at using those
tools, some challenges are just much harder than others.
To me, working on maximizing our mental health is no di erent to
working on our physical health. If you put health on a number scale
with zero as neutral – not unwell but not thriving – a number below
zero would indicate a health problem and any number above zero
would indicate good health. In the last few decades it has become
acceptable and even fashionable to work on maximizing your physical
health through nutrition and exercise. Only more recently has it

become acceptable to openly and visibly work on your mental health.
This means you don’t need to wait until you’re struggling before you
pick up this book, because it is OK to build upon your mental health
and resilience, even if you are not unwell or struggling right now. When
you feed your body with good nutrition and build up stamina and
strength with regular exercise, you know that your body is more able to
ﬁght infection and heal when faced with injury. It’s just the same with
mental health. The more work we do on building self-awareness and
resilience when all is well, the be er able we are to face life’s challenges
when they come our way.
If you pick a skill from this book and ﬁnd it useful, in hard times don’t
stop practising that skill when everything starts to improve. Even when
you are feeling good and don’t think you need it, these skills are
nutrition for your mind. It’s like paying a mortgage rather than rent. You
are investing in your future health.
The things included in this book have a research evidence base. But I
do not rest on that alone. I also know they can help because I have
seen them help, time and time again, for real people. There is hope.
With some guidance and self-awareness, struggle can build strength.
When you start to share things on social media or you write a selfhelp book, lots of people get the impression that you have it all sorted.
I have seen a lot of authors in the self-help industry perpetuate this
idea. They feel they have to look as if the things life throws at them
leave no dents or scars. They suggest that their book contains the
answers – all the answers you will ever need in life. Let me demystify
that one right now.
I am a psychologist. That means I have read a lot of the research that
has been produced on this subject and I have been trained to use it to
help guide other people in their quest towards positive change. I am
also a human. The tools I have acquired do not stop life throwing stu
at you. They help you to navigate, swerve, take a hit and get back up.
They don’t stop you ge ing lost along the way. They help you to notice
when you have lost your way and bravely turn on your heel and head
back towards a life that feels meaningful and purposeful to you. This

book is not the key to a problem-free life. It is a great bunch of tools
that helps me and many others ﬁnd our way through.

The journey so far …
I am not a guru who has all the answers to the universe. This book is
part journal, part guide. In some ways I have always been on a personal
quest to discover how it all pieces together. So this book is me making
use of all those hours spent reading, writing and speaking with real
humans in therapy to understand a bit more about being human and
what helps us while we are here. This is only the journey so far. I
continue to learn and be amazed by people I meet. Scientists keep
asking be er questions and discovering be er answers. So here is my
collection of the most important things I have learned so far that have
helped both me and the people I work with in therapy to ﬁnd our way
through human struggle.
So this book is not necessarily going to ensure that you live the rest
of your days with a smile on your face. It will let you know which tools
you can use to make sure that when you do smile, it is because you
genuinely feel something. It will describe the tools you need to keep reevaluating and ﬁnding your direction, returning to healthier habits and
self-awareness.
Tools might look great in the box. But they only help when you get
them out and start practising how to use them. Each tool takes regular
practice. If you miss the nail with the hammer this time, come back
later and try again. As a fellow human being, I too continue to do this,
and I have only included techniques and skills that I have tried and
found useful both for myself and for the individuals I have worked with.
This book is a resource for me as much as it is for you. I will keep
returning to it time and time again whenever I feel I need to. My wish is
that you will do the same and that it can be a toolbox for life.

CHAPTER 1

Understanding low mood
Everyone has low days.
Everyone.
But we all di er in how frequent the low days are and how severe
the low mood.
Something that I have come to realize over the years of working as a
psychologist is how much people struggle with low mood and never tell
a soul. Their friends and family would never know. They mask it, push it
away and focus on meeting expectations. Sometimes people arrive at
therapy a er years of doing that.
They feel like they’re ge ing something wrong. They compare
themselves to the people who appear to have it all together all of the
time. The ones who are always smiling and apparently full of energy.
They buy into the idea that some people are just like that and
happiness is some sort of personality type. You either have it or you
don’t.
If we see low mood as purely a fault in the brain, we don’t believe we
can change it, so instead we get to work on hiding it. We go about the
day, doing all the right things, smiling at all the right people, yet all the
time feeling a bit empty and dragged down by that low mood, not
enjoying things in the way we are told we should.
Take a moment to notice your body temperature. You might feel
perfectly comfortable, or you may be too hot or too cold. While
changes in how hot or cold you feel could be a sign of infection and
illness, it could just as easily be a signal of things around you. Maybe
you forgot your jacket, which is normally enough to protect you from

the cold. Perhaps the sky has clouded over and it has started to rain.
Maybe you are hungry or dehydrated. When you run for the bus you
notice you warm up. Our body temperature is a ected by our
environment, both internal and external, and we also have the power
to inﬂuence it ourselves. Mood is much the same. When we experience
low mood, it may have been inﬂuenced by several factors from our
internal and external world, but when we understand what those
inﬂuences are, we can use that knowledge to shi it in the direction we
want it to go. Sometimes the answer is to grab an extra layer and run
for the bus. Sometimes it’s something else.
Something that the science has been conﬁrming to us, and something
people o en learn in therapy, is that we have more power to inﬂuence
our emotions than we thought.
This means we get to start working on our own wellbeing and taking
our emotional health into our own hands. It reminds us that our mood
is not ﬁxed and it does not deﬁne who we are; it is a sensation we
experience.
This doesn’t mean we can eradicate low mood or depression. Life still
presents us with hardship, pain and loss and that will always be
reﬂected in our mental and physical health. Instead, it means we can
build up a toolbox with things that help. The more we practise using
those tools, the more skilled we get at using them. So when life throws
us problems that hammer our mood into the ground we have
something to turn to.
The concepts and skills covered are for us all. Research shows them
to be helpful for those with depression, but they are not a controlled
drug that you need a prescription for. They are life skills. Tools that we
can all use as we go through life facing ﬂuctuations in mood, big and
small. For anyone who experiences severe and enduring mental illness it
is always optimal to learn new skills with the support of a professional.

How feelings get created

Sleep is bliss. Then my alarm o ends my ears. It’s too loud and I hate
that tune. It sends a shockwave through my body that I am not ready
for. I press snooze and lie back down. My head is aching and I feel
irritated. I press snooze again. If we don’t get up soon the kids will be
late for school. I need to get ready for my meeting. I close my eyes and
see the to-do list lying on my desk in the o ce. Dread. Irritation.
Exhaustion. I don’t want to do today.
Is this low mood? Did it come from my brain? How did I wake up like
this? Let’s trace back. Last night I stayed up late working. By the time I
got into bed I was too tired to go back downstairs to grab a glass of
water. Then my baby woke up twice in the night. I haven’t slept enough
and I’m dehydrated. The loud alarm woke me from a deep sleep,
sending stress hormones shooting through my body as I woke up. My
heart started pounding and that felt something like stress.
Each of these signals sends information to my brain. We are not OK.
So my brain goes on a hunt for reasons why. It searches, it ﬁnds. So my
physical discomfort, brought about by lack of sleep and dehydration,
helped to create low mood.
Not all low mood is unidentiﬁed dehydration, but when dealing with
mood it is essential to remember that it’s not all in your head. It’s also in
your body state, your relationships, your past and present, your living
conditions and lifestyle. It’s in everything you do and don’t do, in your
diet and your thoughts, your movements and memories. How you feel
is not simply a product of your brain.
Your brain is constantly working to make sense of what is going on.
But it only has a certain number of clues to work from. It takes
information from your body (e.g. heart rate, breathing, blood pressure,
hormones). It takes information from each of your senses – what you
can see, hear, touch, taste and smell. It takes information from your
actions and thoughts. It pieces all these clues together with memories
of when you have felt similar in the past and makes a suggestion, a best
guess about what is happening and what you do about it. That guess
can sometimes be felt as an emotion or a mood. The meaning we make
of that emotion and how we respond to it, in turn, sends information

back to the body and the mind about what to do next (Feldman
Barre , 2017). So when it comes to changing your mood, the
ingredients that go in will determine what comes out.

The two-way road
Lots of self-help books tell us to get our mindset right. They tell us,
‘What you think will change how you feel.’ But they o en miss
something crucial. It doesn’t end there. The relationship works both
ways. The way you feel also inﬂuences the types of thoughts that can
pop into your head, making you more vulnerable to experiencing
thoughts that are negative and self-critical. Even when we know our
thought pa erns aren’t helping, it is so incredibly hard to think
di erently when we feel down, and even harder to follow the rule of
‘only positive thoughts’ that is o en suggested on social media. The
mere presence of those negative thoughts does not mean that they
came ﬁrst and caused the low mood. So thinking di erently may not be
the only answer.
How we think is not the whole picture. Everything we do and don’t
do inﬂuences our mood too. When you feel down, all you want to do is
hide away. You don’t feel like doing any of the things you normally
enjoy, and so you don’t. But disengaging from those things for too long
makes you feel even worse. The loop also occurs with our physical
state. Let’s say you have been too busy to exercise for a few weeks.
You feel tired and low in mood, so exercising is the last thing you want
to do. The longer you avoid the exercise, the more you feel lethargic
and low on energy. When you are low on energy, the chance of
exercising goes down, along with your mood. Low mood gives you the
urge to do the things that make mood worse.

Figure 1: The downward spiral of low mood. How a few days
of low mood can spiral into depression. Breaking the cycle is
easier to do if we recognize it early and act on it. Adapted
from Gilbert (1997).

So we get into these vicious cycles easily because all the di erent
aspects of our experience are impacting each other. But while this
shows us how we can get stuck in a rut, it also shows us the way out.
All these things are interacting to create our experience. But we
don’t experience our thoughts, bodily sensations, emotions and actions
all separately. We experience them together as one. Like wicker strands
woven together, it’s hard to notice each one individually. We just
experience the basket as a whole. That is why we need to get practised
at breaking it down. When we do that we can more easily see what
changes we could make. Figure 2 shows a simple way to break down
your experience.

When we break things down in this way, we can start to recognize
not only what we do that keeps us stuck but also what we do that
helps.
Most people come to therapy knowing that they want to feel
di erent. They have some unpleasant (sometimes excruciating) feelings
they don’t want to have any more and are missing some of the more
enriching emotions (such as joy and excitement) that they would like to
feel more of. We can’t just press a bu on and produce our desired set
of emotions for the day. But we do know that how we feel is closely
entwined with the state of our body, the thoughts we spend time with
and our actions. Those other parts of our experience are the ones that
we can inﬂuence and change. The constant feedback between the
brain, the body and our environment means that we can use those to
inﬂuence how we feel.

Figure 2: Spending time with negative thoughts makes it
highly likely that I will feel low in mood. But feeling low in
mood also makes me more vulnerable to having more
negative thoughts. This shows us how we get stuck in cycles
of low mood. But it also shows us the way out. Adapted from
Greenberger & Padesky (2016).

Where to start
The ﬁrst step to begin ge ing a grasp on low mood is to build our
awareness of each aspect of the experience. This simply means
noticing each one. This awareness starts o with hindsight. We look
back on the day and choose moments to look at in detail. Then, with
time and practice, that builds our ability to notice them in the moment.
This is where we get the opportunity to change things.
In therapy I might ask someone with low mood to notice where they
feel it in their body. They might notice that they feel tired and lethargic
or lose their appetite. They might also notice that when they feel low

they have thoughts like, ‘I don’t feel like doing anything today. I am so
lazy. I’ll never be successful. What a loser.’ They might have the urge to
go back to hide in the bathroom at work for a while and scroll through
social media.
Once you get familiar with what is going on inside your own body
and mind, you can then expand that awareness to looking at what is
going on in your environment and your relationships and the impact
that is having on your internal experience and behaviour. Take your
time ge ing to know the details. When I am feeling this, what am I

thinking about? When I am feeling this, what state is my body in? How
was I looking a er myself in the days or hours leading up to this
feeling? Is this an emotion or just physical discomfort from an unmet
need? There are lots of questions. Sometimes the answers will be clear.
Other times it will all feel too complex. That is OK. Continuing to
explore and write down experiences will help to build up selfawareness about what makes things be er and what makes things
worse.

Toolkit: Reﬂect on what is contributing to your low mood

Use the cross-sectional formulation (see Figure 2, page 16) to practise
the skill of picking up on the di erent aspects of experiences, both
positive and negative. You’ll ﬁnd a blank formulation on page 347 that
you can ﬁll in yourself. Take 10 minutes and pick a moment from that
day to reﬂect on. You may notice that some boxes are easier to ﬁll than
the others.
Reﬂecting on moments a er they happen will help to gradually build
up the skill of noticing the links between those aspects of your
experience as they happen.
Try this: You can use these prompts to help you ﬁll in the
formulation. Or you can simply use these as journal prompts.

What was happening in the lead up to the moment you are
reﬂecting on?
What was happening just before you noticed the new feeling?
What were your thoughts at the time?
What were you focusing your a ention on?
What emotions were present?
Where did you feel that in your body?
What other physical sensations did you notice?
What urges appeared for you?
Did you act on those urges?
If not, what did you do instead?
How did your actions inﬂuence the emotions?
How did your actions inﬂuence your thoughts and beliefs about
the situation?

Chapter summary
Mood ﬂuctuation is normal. Nobody is happy all the time. But
we don’t have to be at the mercy of it either. There are things
we can do that help.
Feeling down is more likely to reﬂect unmet needs than a
brain malfunction.
Each moment of our lives can be broken down into the
di erent aspects of our experience.
Those things all inﬂuence each other. It shows us how we get
stuck in a downward spiral of low mood or even depression.
Our emotions are constructed through a number of things we
can inﬂuence.
We cannot directly choose our emotions and switch them on
but we can use the things we can control to change how we
feel.
Using the cross-sectional formulation (see Figure 2, page 16)
helps to increase awareness of what is impacting on our mood
and keeping us stuck.

CHAPTER 2

Mood pitfalls to watch out for
The problem with instant relief
Low mood gives us the urge to do things that can make our mood even
worse. When we feel discomfort and the threat of low mood, we want
to get back to feeling lighter. Our brain already knows from experience
what tends to help the quickest. So we feel urges to do whatever will
make it all go away as soon as possible. We numb or distract ourselves,
and push the feelings away. For some that is via alcohol, drugs or food.
For others it is watching hours of TV or scrolling through social media.
Each of those things are so inviting because they work – in the short
term. They give us that instant distraction and numbing that we crave.
That is, until we switch o the TV, close down the app, or sober up, and
then the feelings come back. Each time we go round that cycle the
feelings come back even more intense.

Figure 3: The vicious cycle of instant relief. Adapted from the work of Isabel Clark (2017).

Finding ways to manage low mood involves reﬂecting on the ways in
which we respond to those feelings, having compassion for our human
need for relief, while also being honest with ourselves about which of
those a empts to cope are making things worse in the longer term.
O en the things that work best in the long term are not fast-acting.
Try this: Use these questions as journal prompts to help you
reﬂect on your current coping strategies for low mood.

When feeling low, what are your go-to responses?
Do those responses provide instant relief from the pain and
discomfort?
What e ect do they have in the long term?
What do they cost you? (Not in money, but in time, e ort, health,
progress.)

Thought patterns that make you feel worse

As we discussed in the previous chapter, the relationship between
thoughts and feelings goes both ways. The thoughts we spend time
with a ect how we feel, but how we feel also has an e ect on the
thought pa erns that come up. Listed below are some of the thought
biases that we commonly experience when mood is low. They might
sound familiar and that’s because thought biases are normal. They
happen to everyone to varying degrees. But they are more likely to
happen when we experience ﬂuctuations in mood and emotional
states. Understanding what they are and starting to notice them when
they appear is a big step towards taking some of the power out of
them.

Mind reading
Having a grasp on what the people around us are thinking and feeling is
crucial for humans. We live in groups and depend on each other, so we
all spend much of our lives making guesses about what other people
are thinking and feeling. But when we’re feeling down, we are more
likely to assume that those guesses are true. ‘When my friend looked at
me funny I just knew she hated me.’ But on a di erent day, when I’m
not struggling with low mood, I might be more inclined to be a bit more
curious about what was going on and possibly even ask her.
You might notice that you feel the need for more reassurance from
others when your mood is low. If you don’t get that extra reassurance
you might automatically assume that they are thinking negatively about
you. But that is a bias, and it is quite possible that you are your worst
critic.

Overgeneralization
When we are struggling with low mood it only takes one thing to go
wrong, and we have that tendency to write o the whole day. You spill
some milk in the morning. It goes everywhere. You feel stressed and
frustrated as you don’t want to be late. Overgeneralization is when we

see this one event as a sign that today will be ‘one of those days’.
Nothing is going your way, it never does. You start asking the universe
to give you a break because it sure as hell feels like it’s against you
today.
When this happens we start to expect more things to go wrong and
it’s a slippery slope towards hopelessness. Overgeneralizing thoughts
particularly like to show up along with the pain of a breakup. One
relationship ends and our thoughts start to suggest that this means we
will never make a relationship work and could never be happy with
anyone else. It is natural to have these thoughts, but le unchecked
they will contribute to more pain and low mood.

Egocentric thinking
When times are hard and you’re not feeling at your best, this tends to
narrow our focus. It becomes more di cult to consider other people’s
opinions and perspectives, or that they might hold di erent values. This
bias can cause problems in our relationships because it can disrupt how
connected we feel to others. For example, we set ourselves a rule for
living, something like, ‘I must always be on time for everything.’ We
then apply that rule to others and feel o ended or hurt when they fall
short of that. That might make us feel less tolerant of others, disrupt
our mood even further and add relationship tensions into the mix. This
equates with trying to control the uncontrollable and inevitably sends
our low mood spiralling down further.

Emotional reasoning
Just as thoughts are not facts, feelings are not facts either. Emotions
are information, but when that information is powerful, intense and
loud, as emotions can be, then we are more vulnerable to believing in
them as a true reﬂection of what is going on. I feel it therefore it must
be a fact. Emotional reasoning is a thought bias that leads us to use
what we feel as evidence for something to be true, even when there

might be plenty of evidence to suggest otherwise. For example, you
walk out of an exam feeling deﬂated, low in mood and lacking in
conﬁdence. Emotional reasoning tells you this means you must have
failed. You may have performed OK in the exam, but your brain takes
information from how you feel and you’re not feeling like a winner right
now. The low mood could have been created by the stress followed by
exhaustion, but the feeling is inﬂuencing how you then interpret your
situation.

The mental ﬁlter
The thing about the human brain is that, when you believe something,
the brain will scan the environment for any signs that the belief is true.
Information that challenges our beliefs about ourselves and the world is
psychologically threatening. Things suddenly become unpredictable and
that doesn’t feel safe. So the brain tends to discount it and hold on to
whatever ﬁts with previous experience, even if that belief causes
distress. So during hard times, when you may be feeling low and believe
that you are a failure, your mind will act like a sieve, le ing go of all the
information that suggests otherwise, and holding on to any indication
that you have not lived up to expectation.
Let’s say you post a picture on social media and plenty of your
followers leave positive comments. But you are not looking for those.
You skim past them, searching for any negative ones. If you ﬁnd any,
you might then spend a signiﬁcant portion of your day thinking it over,
feeling hurt, and doubting yourself.
In evolutionary terms, it makes sense that when you feel vulnerable,
you keep an extra lookout for signs of threat. But when you are trying
to come back from a dark place, the mental ﬁlter is something to be
aware of.

Musts and shoulds

Beware of those musts and shoulds! I don’t mean the healthy and
normal sense of duty we have to our community. I mean the relentless
expectations that send us on a downward spiral of unhappiness. I must
be more this, and I should feel that.
The musts and shoulds are heavily tied up with perfectionism. For
example, if you feel you must never fail, you are se ing yourself up for
a rollercoaster of emotions and a struggle with mood when you make a
mistake or encounter a setback. We can strive for success and accept
failures along the way. But when we set ourselves unrealistic
expectations, we become trapped by them. That means we su er
whenever there is any sign that we may not be living up to them.
So watch out for those musts and shoulds. When you are already
struggling with mood, expecting yourself to do, be and have everything
that you are when you’re at your best is not realistic or helpful.

All-or-nothing thinking
Also known as black-and-white thinking, this is another thought bias
that can make mood worse if we leave it unchecked. This is when we
think in absolutes or extremes. I am either a success or a complete

failure. If I don’t look perfect, I’m ugly. If I make a mistake, I should
never have bothered. This polarized thinking style leaves no room for

the grey areas that are o en closer to reality. The reason this pa ern
of thought makes everything harder is because it makes us vulnerable
to more intense emotional reactions. If failing one exam means you are
a failure as a person, then the emotional fallout from that will be more
extreme and much harder to pull back from.
When you feel low in mood, you’re more likely to think in this
polarized way. But it’s important to remember that this is not because
your brain is ge ing things wrong or malfunctioning in any way. When
we are under stress, all-or-nothing thinking creates a sense of certainty
or predictability about the world. What we then miss is the chance to
think things through more logically, weighing up the di erent sides of
the argument and coming to a more informed judgement.

Figure 4: Table of thought bias examples.
THOUGHT BIAS

WHAT IS IT?

EXAMPLE

Mind reading

Making assumptions about
what others are thinking
and feeling.

‘She hasn’t called in a
while because she hates
me.’

Overgeneralization

Taking one event and
using it to generalize
about other things.

‘I failed my exam. My
future is ruined.’

Egocentric thinking

Assuming that others have
the same perspective and
values as we have, and
judging their behaviour
through that lens.

‘I would never be late like
that. He obviously doesn’t
care enough about me.’

Emotional reasoning

I feel it, therefore it must
be true.

‘I feel guilty, therefore I
am a bad parent.’

Musts and shoulds

Relentless and unrealistic
expectations that set us
up to feel like a failure
every day.

‘I must always look
perfect.’ ‘I should never do
any less than my absolute
best.’

All-or-nothing thinking

Thinking in absolutes or
extremes.

‘If I don’t get 100 per cent
I’m a failure.’ ‘If I don’t look
perfect I’m not going out.’

What to do with thought biases
Now you know some of the common thought biases that can make
your mood worse, what next? We can’t stop those thoughts from
arriving, but the power is all in seeing them for what they are (biased)
and then managing how we respond to them. If we can acknowledge
that each of our thoughts presents just one possible idea among many,
then we open ourselves up to the possibility of considering others. This
means the original thought has less power over our emotional state.

To be sure we respond to them in the way we want to, ﬁrst we need
to notice the biases when they appear. If we don’t step back and see
them as a bias, we buy into them as if they present a fair reﬂection of
reality. Then they can feed that low mood and exert their inﬂuence
over what we do next.
Noticing thought biases sounds obvious, and it is simple. But it’s not
always easy. When we’re in the moment, we don’t only experience a
thought that we can see clearly. We experience the mess of emotions,
physical sensations, images, memories and urges, all at once. We are so
used to doing everything on autopilot that stopping to check out the
details of the process can take a lot of practice.
Here are some ways you can start to spot thought biases and the
impact they have on you.

Getting started
High emotion states can make it hard to think clearly, so it can be
easier to start by reﬂecting on thought biases a er the emotions
of the moment have passed. You build your awareness by looking
back, but that gradually builds towards awareness in real time.
Start keeping a journal and choose speciﬁc moments to focus on
(both positive and negative). Make a distinction between what you
were thinking at the time, what emotions you noticed and what
physical sensations came with that. Once you have the thoughts
wri en down, go over the list of biases and see if your thoughts
might have been biased at the time.
If you are in the moment and have the chance to write something
down, put pen to paper and express your thoughts, feelings and
bodily sensations. But as you do that, try to use language that
helps you get some distance from those thoughts and feelings. For
example, I am having thoughts that … or I am noticing these
sensations. This use of language helps you to step back from the

thoughts and feelings, to see them as an experience that is
washing over you, rather than an absolute truth.
If you have someone you trust and conﬁde in, you can share with
them the thought biases that you are prone to and they can help
you to spot them and call them out. But this requires a very good
relationship with someone who is accepting and respectful and
supports you in your choice to work on change and growth. It is
not easy to be called out in the moment, so this one takes some
careful planning to make sure it works for you.
Starting a mindfulness practice is the way forward when you want
to get a bird’s-eye view of what your thoughts are doing. Having a
set time of the day when you pay a ention to your thoughts is a
great idea. It’s your formal practice to build that ability to step
back from your thoughts and observe them without judgement.

A few pointers
As we are building awareness of our thoughts, we need to work hard to
see that pa ern of thought as just one possible interpretation of the
world and allow ourselves to consider alternatives. Spo ing these
common thought biases and labelling them helps us to do that.
This is not something we do just once. It takes continued e ort and
practice. Sometimes you may not spot a thought as biased. At other
times you will be able to spot them and come back at them with a
more helpful alternative.
In trying to ﬁnd alternatives, some people try to look for the correct
answer. It is not so much the exact wording of the alternative
perspective that is important. What ma ers more is the practice of
stopping before you buy into a thought as fact and actively considering
other views. As a general rule, it helps to look for a perspective that
feels more balanced, fair and compassionate and that takes into
account all the information available. Emotions tend to drive more
extreme and biased views. But life is o en more complex and full of

grey areas. It’s OK not to have a clear opinion on something while you
take time to think about di erent sides of the story. So give yourself
permission to sit on the fence for as long as you need to. Build up that
ability to tolerate not knowing. When we do that, we are choosing to
stop living life by the ﬁrst thoughts that pop into our head. Our choices
become more consciously thought-out.
Let’s say I spill the milk all over the ﬂoor at breakfast and
immediately start asking myself why I am such a failure in life and why
nothing ever goes right for me. That’s a nice mix of generalization and
all-or-nothing thinking right there. If I can spot that bias and call it out, I
can open up this window of opportunity in which I can reduce the
intensity of that emotional response that might otherwise follow. It is
never fun to spill milk, but our relationship with our thoughts can make
the di erence between a few minutes of frustration and something
that ruins your mood for the entire day. Like everything in this book, it’s
very easy to say, but much harder to do. It takes practice and it doesn’t
make us invincible. But it helps, and it stops small moments turning into
big ones.

Chapter summary
Thought bias is inevitable but we are not helpless to its
e ects.
We naturally look for evidence that conﬁrms our beliefs. We
then experience what we believe, even when there is
evidence to suggest otherwise.
Whatever has caused our low mood, it tends to come along
with a focus on threat and loss (Gilbert, 1997).
This bias towards the negative can then feed back to intensify
the low mood if we continue to focus on and believe those
thoughts to be facts.
One strategy against the downward spiral this can cause is
understanding that how we feel is not evidence that our
thoughts are true.
Another strategy is taking a stance of curiosity.
Get some distance from those thoughts by becoming familiar
with the common biases, noticing when they appear and
labelling them as biases, not facts.

CHAPTER 3

Things that help
Getting some distance
In the 1994 movie The Mask, Jim Carrey plays a banker called Stanley

Ipkiss. He ﬁnds a wooden mask that was created by Loki, the Norse god
of mischief. When he puts it on, it wraps itself around the back of his
head and consumes him, inﬂuencing his every move. He becomes the
mask.
With the mask right in front of his face, he sees the world through
that lens. There is no room for any other perspective. When he pulls it
o his face and holds it in his hand at arm’s length, the mask loses its
power to change how Stanley feels and behaves. It is still there, but just
that li le bit of distance allows Stanley to see that it’s just a mask, it’s
not who he is.
When we feel low in mood, thoughts can become all-consuming in
this way. The brain senses from the body that things are not OK and
starts o ering up lots of reasons why that may be. Before you know it,
a swarm of negative, self-critical thoughts are buzzing around your
head. If we fuse with those thoughts and allow them to consume us,
they can send the already low mood spiralling down further.
All those self-help books that told the world to just think positive
didn’t account for the fact that you can’t control the thoughts that
arrive in your mind. The part you can control is what you do once they
appear.
One of the most important skills for learning to deal with thoughts
and their impact on our mood is ge ing some distance from them.

Sounds di cult when those thoughts are inside your own mind, but
humans have a powerful tool that helps us to put thoughts at arm’s
length and give us the distance we need. It’s called metacognition,
which is a fancy name for thoughts about your thoughts.
We have this ability to think. But we also have the ability to think
about what we are thinking. Metacognition is the process of stepping
back from the thoughts and ge ing enough distance to allow us to see
those thoughts for what they really are. When you do this, they lose
some of their power over you and how you feel and behave. You get to
choose how you respond to them rather than feeling controlled and
driven by something.
Metacognition sounds complicated but it is simply the process of
noticing which thoughts pop into your head and observing how they
make you feel. You can have a go by pausing for a few minutes and
noticing where your mind wanders to. Notice how you can choose to
focus in on a thought, like Stanley pu ing the mask over his face, or
you can let it pass and wait for the next thought to arrive.
The power of any thought is in how much we buy into it. How much
we believe it to be true and meaningful. When we observe our own
thought processes in this way, we start to see thoughts for what they
are, and what they are not. Thoughts are not facts. They are a mix of
opinions, judgements, stories, memories, theories, interpretations, and
predictions about the future. They are ideas o ered up by your brain
about ways we could make sense of the world. But the brain has limited
information to go on. The brain’s job is also to save you as much time
and energy as possible. This means it takes short-cuts and makes
guesses and predictions all the time.
Mindfulness is a great tool for practising the observation of your
thoughts and strengthening that mental muscle that allows you to
notice a thought and choose not to stick to it, but to let it pass, making
a deliberate choice about where to focus your a ention.

Mindfulness: Grabbing the spotlight

In the previous chapter I listed a few of the common thought biases
that tend to be a feature of low mood. While some self-help books may
tell you to ‘just think positive’, the problem with that is we cannot
control the thoughts that arrive. If we try not to have certain thoughts
then we are, by default, already thinking them. It’s also not realistic.
Lots of people face incredible hardship in their lives. We don’t want to
add to that burden by se ing the impossible standard of only
producing positive thoughts in terrible times. That is likely to add some
self-criticism into the mix when they realize they cannot do that and
start to think it is a personal failure.
So, while we cannot transcribe every thought that the mind
produces, our power is in how we respond once it arrives.
When it comes to thoughts, a ention is power. If you imagine your
a ention as a spotlight, many people leave that spotlight to move
freely, wherever the wind blows. Your brain will occasionally take
control if there are any signs of danger or threat. But we can also
consciously choose to redirect that spotlight, paying a ention to
speciﬁc aspects of our experience on purpose.
This is not the same as blocking thoughts and trying to ignore them.
It is being intentional about which thoughts you give the limelight to,
which ones you zoom in on and turn up the volume.
Many people come to therapy knowing what they don’t want. They
know they have some thoughts and feelings that they would like to get
rid of. But when we turn towards the future they do want, it can come
as a bit of a shock, for the simple reason that they have never asked
themselves that question before. Painful problems can be so
overwhelming and demanding of our a ention that we start to focus
more on that and less on what we want instead.
Many of us are out of the habit of asking ourselves what we want.
We have responsibilities: a boss to answer to, a mortgage to pay,
children to feed. Over time, we come to realize that our wellbeing is
not where we’d like it to be, but we have no idea what we actually want
or need, because, well, we never think about it.

Now I am not about to tell you that you can manifest things in your
life just by focusing on them. But we have to look where we are going if
we want to stay on course.
Your a ention is valuable and helps to create your experience of life.
So learning to control where you direct it can have a powerful impact
on your life and your mood. But we are busy, and life is full of daily
responsibilities and duties that we have done a thousand times before.
So our incredible brains like to make things easier for us by switching on
to autopilot and doing most things automatically. That is why practices
such as mindfulness meditation have become so popular. It enables us
to get some formal practice. If you want to learn to drive, you take
lessons. I see mindfulness practice as the driving lesson for managing
the mind. It might feel boring, scary or frustrating at times, but it gives
your brain the chance to lay down that neural pathway, so that when
you need to use those skills later, they come without too much e ort.
Practising mindfulness can be really daunting when you ﬁrst get
started, because you’re not sure what you should be doing, if you are
ge ing it right, or how you should feel while you’re doing it. So in the
toolkit at the end of this chapter you will ﬁnd a few simple steps to
guide you. It doesn’t have to be complex. It doesn’t have to be a
profound experience. It’s like li ing weights in the gym, but this time
we are working a mental muscle, and as it grows, your ability to choose
where you focus your a ention increases, and along with it, so does
your ability to manage your mood.

How to stop the rumination
Rumination is like a thoughts washing machine. It’s the process of
churning thoughts over and over for minutes, hours or days at a time.
We already know that the depressed brain is more likely to focus on
the thought biases that can make you feel worse. If you combine those
thought biases with the psychological equivalent of rumination, then
you have a recipe for more intense and prolonged distress. In fact, we

know from the research that rumination is a key factor in maintaining
depression (Watkins & Roberts, 2020). The more you ruminate, the
more you stay stuck. It works to intensify and prolong any sadness or
depression that may be there.
Remember what we said before about neural pathways? The more
you do something, the more established that neural activity becomes.
This means the more you churn over painful thoughts or memories, the
easier it becomes for you to bring those things to mind. You ﬁnd
yourself in a trap in which you continuously re-trigger painful emotions
and distress and spiral down into a dark place.
So, what can we do to stop the rumination that feeds painful
emotion?
When trying to change something in the moment, purely using a
mental concept in our heads to re-focus on something new can be
hugely di cult. I have seen many people use an active approach to
good e ect. When you notice that you are sliding down the slippery
slope of rumination, try a ﬁrm hand pushed out in front and one word,
‘Stop!’, quickly followed by physical movement, such as standing up and
moving away from the position you are in. Change activity for a
moment, or even just walk around or step outside for a few minutes,
whatever is possible at the time. Physically moving your body can help
to shi your mind when it is otherwise very di cult.
Given that rumination invites us to swim around in thoughts of our
worst traits and worst moments, and given the physiological
implications of that on how we feel, one of the simplest ways to
redirect things, when we are not sure of the way out, is a question:
‘What would I do if I was at my best?’ Now, if you are experiencing dark
times and depression, you cannot expect yourself to be doing whatever
you would be doing at your best. But you can create a mental picture of
the direction you want to move in. So, if I am si ing ruminating on a
painful experience in my life and have lost several hours to that
churning, I can ask myself that question. The answer may be, ‘I would
stand up, take a shower and put some music on that li s my mood. Or
perhaps I would pick an activity I enjoy that absorbs my a ention.’

For anyone who is prone to rumination, time alone opens up the
gates of the arena for the thoughts and memories and subsequent
emotional pain to come ﬂooding in and start circling your mind. Human
connection is quite possibly the most powerful tool we have to let
those thoughts exit a er a few rounds. Friends or a therapist will listen
carefully to each one. But they can be great at holding up a mirror to
our minds by reﬂecting back to us what they notice. They help to build
our self-awareness and provide prompts or cues to call a stop to the
rumination and shi to something new and more helpful to our
wellbeing.

Mindfulness
Mindfulness is a state of mind that we can try to cultivate at any time.
It means paying a ention to the present moment, with awareness of
thoughts, feelings and bodily sensations that arrive, without judgement
or distraction. It does not rapidly eliminate low mood or change the
problems you face. But it does hone your awareness of the details of
your experience so that you are more able to choose carefully how you
respond. But it can be di cult if you are not sure how to do it.
Meditation is like a gym workout for the mind. It provides a space to
practise the skills being used.

How to do it
If you are new to mindfulness, guided meditations are a good place to
start. There are lots to choose from online, and I have included some
on my YouTube channel. There are lots of di erent techniques, each
based on their own traditions, but most of them share the purpose of
aiming to create clarity of mind. So try out a few di erent styles and
see which one suits you best.

Gratitude practice
Gratitude practice is another simple way to get used to turning your
a ention. Find a small notebook and, once a day, write down three
things that you feel grateful for. They can be something big like your
loved ones, or it can be a small detail of your day that you appreciate,
such as the taste of your co ee as you sit down to work. Now, this
sounds almost too simple to be e ective, but every time you engage in
gratitude, your brain is ge ing practice at turning its a ention to things
that create pleasant emotional states. The more practice you get – the
easier it becomes to use that in other situations.
Toolkit: Making gratitude a habit

Write down three things you feel thankful for. They can be the
larger, more profound aspects of your life or the tiniest of details
from your day. What ma ers is not what you choose to include,
but the practice of turning your a ention on purpose.
Spend a few minutes reﬂecting on those things and allowing
yourself to feel the sensations and emotions that come along with
a focus on gratitude.
Doing this once is nice. Doing it every day is a life practice that
builds the mental muscle to choose where you focus your
a ention and allows you to experience the beneﬁts.

Chapter summary
We cannot control the thoughts that pop into our minds, but
we do have control of our spotlight of a ention.
Trying not to think about something tends to make us think
about it more.
Allowing all thoughts to be present, but choosing which ones
we give our time and a ention to, can have a powerful
impact on our emotional experience.
Turning our a ention is a skill that can be practised with both
mindfulness and gratitude practice.
While there is a time for focusing on a problem, we also need
to focus on the direction we want to move in, and how we
want to feel or behave.
Thoughts are not facts. They are suggestions o ered up to us
by the brain to help us make sense of the world.
The power of any thought is in how much we believe it to be
the only truth.
Taking power out of those thoughts starts with stepping back,
ge ing some distance (metacognition) and seeing them for
what they are.

CHAPTER 4

How to turn bad days into
better days
When we feel low in mood it can start to feel di cult to make decisions
that, on be er days, we make in an instant. Shall I call in sick or shall I
push through and see how it goes? Shall I call my friend or shall I wait
until I feel more up to it? Shall I try to eat something healthy or shall I
eat something more comforting?
The problem with decision-making when you feel down is that low
mood gives us the urge to do things that we know will keep us stuck.
But the things that we know could help feel overwhelming. We start to
focus on what is the best decision to make and berate ourselves for not
doing it already. This is perfectionism rearing its head. Perfectionism
paralyses the decision-making process because every decision has some
inherent uncertainty. And every choice includes some negative sidee ects to be tolerated.
When it comes to tackling low mood, we have to focus on making
good decisions, not perfect decisions. A good decision is one that
moves you in the direction you want to go. It doesn’t have to catapult
you there.
But something we must do is keep making decisions, however small.
In any survival situation, making decisions and moving is essential. If
you ﬁnd yourself in deep water in the dark, with no way of telling which
direction leads to safety, what you do know is that if you don’t choose
a direction and start moving, you won’t be able to keep your head
above the surface for long. Low mood wants you to do nothing.

Therefore, doing anything positive, however small, is a healthy step in
the direction you want to go.
O en what makes decisions more di cult in periods of low mood is
our tendency to make decisions based on how we feel and how we
want to feel right now. Basing our decisions instead on personal
meaning and purpose can o er a shi from an emotional focus to
decisions and actions based on our values. When dealing with low
mood, focus on your personal values around health. What is important
to you about your physical and mental health? How do you want to be
living your daily life in a way that expresses that? How much are you
living in line with those values at the moment? What is one thing you
could do today that would steer you in the direction of looking a er
your health in the way you want to?

Consistency
When your mood is low and the small daily tasks feel like too much,
don’t go se ing yourself extreme goals that feel out of reach. Pick one
small change that you know you can action every day. Then make a
promise to yourself that you will make it happen. It may seem silly at
ﬁrst, because those small changes won’t reward you with instant, drastic
results. But they are doing something much more important. They are
laying down the pathways for a new habit that you can integrate into
your everyday life and build upon over time as it becomes second
nature. So keep it small. Keep it consistent. Slow change is sustainable
change.

Don’t kick yourself while you’re down
We can’t talk about tackling low mood without talking about selfcriticism and self-a ack. Low mood increases any self-criticism or selfa ack that we already do. It’s very easy to tell someone to just stop
being hard on themselves. But when something has been a habit from a

young age, just telling yourself to stop is not likely to cut it. We can’t
stop those thoughts arriving. But we can build our ability to notice
them and respond in a way that gives them less power over how we
feel and behave. We can use the same skills that we covered for
catching thought biases and ge ing some distance from them. This
helps us to recognize that those thoughts are emotion-loaded
judgements, not facts.
Bring to mind someone you love unconditionally. Now imagine they
were speaking about themselves the way that you speak to yourself.
How would you respond to them? What would you want them to have
the courage to see in themselves? How would you want them to speak
to themselves instead?
This task is one way to help us access that deep sense of compassion
that we o en show to others but neglect to show for ourselves.
Self-compassion does not have to be airy-fairy self-indulgence. It is
being the voice that you most need to hear, one that will give you the
strength to pull yourself back up rather than drive you further into the
ground. It is a voice of honesty, encouragement, support and kindness.
It is the nurturing voice that dusts you o and looks you directly in the
eye, telling you to go back out there and have another go. It is the
parent, the coach, the personal cheerleader. There is a good reason
that elite athletes have someone in their corner between rounds, sets
and heats. They understand the potent impact of the words that ﬁll
your head. Whether you are in a boxing ring, a tennis court, a meeting
at work or an exam hall, the same rule applies.
So talking to ourselves in the same way we would support and
encourage someone we love is a powerful component in managing
mood.

How do you want to feel instead?
When we are trying to tackle low mood, the tendency is to focus on
everything we don’t want to think and feel. There is value in doing that.

But if we want to move away from what we don’t want, it helps to
know where we do want to go instead.

Figure 5: Example formulation for low mood.

Toolkit: Figuring out what you can do to change how you
feel

Start by ﬁlling in the hot cross bun formulation for the low mood
scenario found at the back of the book (see page 347). I’ve put an
example here (Figure 5).
Once you have broken down the thoughts and behaviours that are
contributing to your low mood, ﬁll in the blank formulation for your
be er days (see page 348). This time, start with the emotions box and
ﬁll it with the emotions you would like to feel more of in your everyday
life instead of the low mood. I have put an example below (Figure 6).
Knowing that your physical state, the focus of your thoughts and
your behaviour all contribute to that feeling, use the following prompts

to help you ﬁll in the rest of that formulation:
When you have felt that way in the past, what has been the focus
of your a ention?
What might your thoughts/self-talk need to sound like in order for
you to feel that way?
When you have felt that way before, how did you behave? What
did you do more of or less of?
If you were to feel that way, how would you need to be treating
your body?
When you are feeling at your best, what do your thoughts sound
like?
What do you tend to be focused on? What does that inner voice
sound like then?

Figure 6: Example formulation for be er days. How do you
want to feel, behave, think?

See if it reveals anything that has worked for you in the past, or o ers
insights into things that you could pay a ention to or change about
your daily life. Use it to spend time examining what works.
Try this (solution-focused miracle question): Take a moment
to imagine that when you close this book a miracle happens and
the problems you have been struggling with all disappear.

What would be the ﬁrst signs that the problem has gone?
What would you do di erently?
What would you say yes to?
What would you say no to?
What would you focus your energy and a ention on?
What would you do more or less of?
How would you interact with people di erently?
How would you structure your life di erently?
How would you speak to yourself di erently?
What would you be free to let go of?
Take some time to explore your answers to these questions, down to
the ﬁnest detail of those small changes that you would make to your
everyday life. This is a great exercise for creating a vision of where you
are heading. It also helps you to explore the idea of how life might be
improved by starting to make some of those changes now, even with
the problems still present. What we do and how we do it feeds back to
our body and brain about how to feel, so shi ing direction towards
what ma ers most, and the person we want to be alongside our
problems, can bring about big shi s in mood. This technique shi s our
focus from the problem to the solution, and we can start to ﬁx our gaze
on the horizon that we are heading towards.

Chapter summary
Focus on making good decisions, not perfect ones. ‘Good
enough’ steers you towards real change. Perfectionism causes
decision-making paralysis, whereas improving your mood
demands that you make decisions and take action.
Keep changes small and sustainable.
When someone is down, we show them kindness because we
know it is what they need. So, if you are commi ed to
managing your mood and overall mental health, commit to
practising self-compassion.
Once you understand the problem, use it to help you work
out where you want to go and focus on the horizon ahead of
you.

CHAPTER 5

How to get the basics right
Imagine taking the best football team in the world and pu ing them on
the pitch without any defence players on their side. Suddenly,
opponents that never previously posed any threat would stand a much
be er chance at winning. While the defence players may not be as
exciting as the strikers, we all underestimate their power to change the
game.
We all have the tendency to neglect the basics. Your mother tells you
to get to bed early and eat your greens and you can’t help but roll your
eyes. Thanks, Mum. But when it comes to defence players, you don’t
know what you’ve got till it’s gone. The basics are the ﬁrst thing we let
slide when we are not feeling so good. We withdraw from friends, we
drink too much co ee and then can’t sleep, we stop exercising. But
what di erence does it really make? Well, the science suggests that it’s
a bit like taking each of your defence players o the pitch and leaving
an open goal.
The basics are not glamorous. They don’t give us that hit of having
bought something that promises to ﬁx everything. But they are cash in
the health bank. When life starts throwing things at you, those
defences are going to keep you standing, and help to pull you back up if
you fall.
It’s worth pointing out that you don’t have to approach them all
perfectly. There is no perfect diet that everyone agrees on, or optimal
amount and type of social interaction. These are not goals to be
achieved to perfection. They are foundations. Those defence players
need as much nurturing as the strikers, because they are crucial for

staying in the game. But where one slips, another can help out. When
those defences get compromised, it’s not a sign of fault or failure. It’s
generally a sign that life is happening. For example, a new parent is
likely to have no control over the sleep deprivation they face. But they
can take extra care to eat well and keep up social contact with friends
and family, which will help to keep them well throughout that period.
Understanding what those main defences are means that we can
keep them on the radar. We can check in with them on a regular basis
and look for small ways in which we might be able to improve them and
strengthen them.
If you are tempted to skip over this because you think you’ve heard
it all before, then it’s even more important to read it. We underestimate
the power of these defences so much that they are o en the ﬁrst
things we let go when we are under stress or not feeling so good. But
not only is the science crystal clear on these; in recent years, it has also
shown their potency to be even more far-reaching than we once
thought.

Exercise
Whether your low mood is mild and intermi ent or you live with a
major depressive disorder, exercise has potent antidepressant e ects
(Schuch et al., 2016). For those who use antidepressant medication,
adding in exercise leads to be er results (Mura et al., 2014).
Exercise leads to higher circulating levels of dopamine as well as
more available dopamine receptors in the brain (Olsen, 2011). This
means it increases your capacity for pleasure in everyday life
(McGonigal, 2019). So ﬁnding exercise you enjoy does not only o er
you joy while you are exercising, but increases your sensitivity to ﬁnd
joy in all the other aspects of your life.
Unfortunately for us, the concept of exercise has been branded as a
painful process that you must go through for the purpose of altering
your appearance. The conversation is mostly centred around enduring

pain for some aesthetic gain. No wonder that so many people see
exercise as not for them.
The focus on how moving your body makes you feel has been le out
of the conversation for too long. Yet, throughout the pandemic many
people have rediscovered the joys of exercising in green spaces. Being
forced to spend so much time indoors made the e ects of that daily
walk all the more salient. The psychological impact of exercising, not on
a treadmill indoors, but outside in nature, is starting to be
demonstrated by the science. In a study of adults undergoing Cognitive
Behavioural Therapy (CBT) for depression, the group whose therapy
was provided in a forest se ing showed a remission rate that was 61 per
cent higher than those who underwent the same programme in a
hospital se ing (Kim et al., 2009).
For those who can’t stand the idea of vigorous exercise, the slower
movements of yoga can still have signiﬁcant e ects on mood as well as
increase the ability to calm the mind and body more quickly (Josefsson
et al., 2013).
Deciding to add in exercise to your life does not mean you have to
take up ultra marathons or weightli ing at an expensive gym. In fact, it
is much easier to gain momentum if you start as small as you can. You
might not even leave the house to begin with. You might put on your
favourite music and dance around until you feel a li le out of breath. If
you can make it small and choose something that has the potential to
bring you joy, it is much more likely to be sustainable. A one-o
workout won’t change everything, but a small increase in physical
activity that you can keep up has the power to become a catalyst for
signiﬁcant life change.
Exercise does much more than just give you a li le boost in mood. It
positively impacts on your mind and body in countless ways. But don’t
take my word for it. Find a way to increase your activity in a way that
feels enjoyable or meaningful to you and see how you start to feel.

Sleep

Take anyone on this earth and start depriving them of sleep and that
person will become vulnerable to both physical and mental illness. But
that relationship between sleep and mental health works both ways.
When your mental health dips because of stress, low mood or anxiety,
your sleep is likely to be disturbed at some point too. Whichever came
ﬁrst, you can almost guarantee that when your sleep takes a dive so will
your mood and your belief in your ability to bounce back. When you
haven’t had enough sleep, everything feels ten times harder. Sleep has a
profound e ect on every aspect of your wellbeing, so if you think your
sleep is not as good as it could be it is well worth your time and e ort
to try improving it.
For those who experience long-term insomnia, working with a
specialist is highly recommended. But if you want to work on improving
the amount or quality of sleep you are ge ing, I have included a list of
tips below to get you started. Again, we are not aiming for perfection
and you don’t have to do everything on the list to get good enough
sleep. There are times when life happens and it pulls you away from a
healthy sleep pa ern. If you work shi s, travel long-haul, have young
children or a habit of staying up late playing computer games, you can
learn to check in with yourself and put in place whatever is necessary
to steer you back in the right direction.
Keep vigorous exercise to earlier in the day and try using the
evenings for relaxation.
A warm bath before bed can help your body reach a temperature
that is optimal for sleep.
Try to get as much natural light as possible within the ﬁrst 30
minutes a er waking. Our circadian rhythm that regulates our
sleep pa ern is governed by exposure to light. Indoor light can
help, but natural light outdoors is best, even on a cloudy day. Step
outside for 10 minutes ﬁrst thing in the morning. Also make time to
get outside as much as possible throughout the day.
In the evening, when the sun goes down, keep lights low. When it
comes to screens, the research suggests it is less about the colour

of the screen light and more about the brightness. So turn down
the brightness on screens in the evening as much as possible and
switch them o altogether as early as possible.
Make time in the day to tackle things you are worried about. Make
your decisions, make your plans, take something o your to-do list.
Ge ing good sleep is also about what you do during the day. We
are much be er at problem-solving during the daylight hours, but
if we push those problems away and ignore them, they tend to
pop up at night when we are trying to sleep. So clear the desk and
clear your mind as much as you can.
For those nights when laying your head on the pillow is the cue for
your brain to switch on and start worrying, try keeping a worry list.
Put pen and paper beside the bed. When a worry pops into your
mind, write it down. Just a few words or bullet points. Do the same
for any other worries that come up. This becomes your to-do list
for the next day. You make a promise to yourself that you will
dedicate time tomorrow to working through these problems. That
way you are free to let them go for now and re-focus your
a ention on rest.
You can’t force sleep. Making sleep happen is not something you
can choose to do. Sleep happens when we create an environment
in which the body and mind can feel safe and calm. So don’t
concentrate on sleep, concentrate on relaxation, rest and calm.
Your brain will do the rest.
Avoid ca eine in the late a ernoon and evening. The energy
drinks that are being promoted to young people o en contain high
levels of ca eine that disturb sleep and cause symptoms of
anxiety.
As a general rule it’s a good idea not to consume too much of
anything in the lead up to bedtime. This especially includes big
meals with high levels of reﬁned sugar. Anything that gives you a
spike in stress levels is not going to help you get to sleep and stay
asleep.

Nutrition
Mental health and physical health are weaves in the same basket. If one
moves, the other moves. In recent years the science has made strides in
demonstrating this. How you feed your brain inﬂuences how you feel.
The research is even showing that improvements in nutrition can
have large beneﬁts for depressive symptoms (Jacka et al., 2017) and
making positive changes to how we eat might help prevent depression
as we age (Sanchez-Villegas et al., 2013).
When we understand that our mood is inﬂuenced by several factors,
it makes good sense to tackle that from all sides. With just a moment of
reﬂection, most of us could easily come up with a few ways in which we
could nourish our body be er. The research being done across the
world suggests there is not one, strict diet that protects your mental
health. The traditional Mediterranean diet shows the largest and
strongest evidence base for mental health beneﬁts, but many others
show a reduced risk of depression, including the traditional Norwegian,
Japanese and Anglo-Saxon diets too (Jacka, 2019). The things they all
tend to have in common are the inclusion of whole, unprocessed food,
healthy fats and wholegrains.
There is a lot of misinformation around food, so in the resources
section of this book I have included suggestions for further reading
from credible sources, if you would like to read further. But the
overarching idea is that making good nutrition a priority (and educating
yourself about what that looks like if you need to) is a great idea for
tackling low mood and improving your mental health.
But as I mentioned before, making huge life transformations
overnight is less helpful if you cannot sustain them. Instead, it is helpful
to ask ourselves on a regular basis, ‘What is one small change I could
put in place today that would improve my nutritional intake?’ Then
repeat this every day.

Routine

Another key defence player for mental health and resilience seems to
be routine. This may have been the most underestimated inﬂuence on
our wellbeing until the pandemic turned routine upside down and inside
out for so many people.
Repetition and predictability help us feel safe, but we also have a
need for variety and a sense of adventure. So we like to have routine,
and we like to break those routines occasionally – preferably with
something pleasurable, meaningful or exciting.
When we are not feeling so great, routine can su er. You might stay
up late watching television because you are blocking out stressful
thoughts about work the next day. Then it’s harder to get up in the
morning, so you stop your morning workout.
Or maybe you are out of work for a period of time and you start
taking a nap in the a ernoon, but then struggle to sleep at night. Being
o work changes how much social interaction you get. You don’t leave
the house for days and struggle with ﬁnding a reason to shower, or
even get up in the morning. Then your appetite goes but you have no
energy, so you mostly spend the day drinking co ee … and so the
cascading e ect of a routine change unfolds.
Each of these seemingly small changes ma ers because they add up
to and create your experience as a whole. If you have a tall glass of
water and you pour a small drop of cordial into it, you might barely be
able to notice a di erence. If you add another couple of small drops,
the general colour of the water begins to change. Enough of those
small drops over time will dramatically change the overall colour and
taste of the water. So each small drop counts, even though they may
not be enough by themselves to change how you feel entirely.
That said, there is no perfect routine. Establishing a balance of
predictability and adventure that works for you within your unique
circumstances is key. Noticing when that goes o track and pulling it
back is a big step in the right direction.

Human connection

While looking a er your own body and mind is essential, nurturing
good quality relationships is one of the most powerful tools we have in
maintaining good mental health throughout the lifespan (Waldinger &
Schulz, 2010).
When our relationships are not going well, it can have a catastrophic
impact on our mood and emotional state. It can also work the other
way. Deterioration in our mood can be damaging to our relationships. It
can leave us feeling disconnected from the people around us and
trigger a deep sense of loneliness.
When you’re feeling low, the thought of facing anyone can be
exhausting and overwhelming. This is the trap of depression. It tells us
to withdraw, hide away, don’t see anyone until we feel be er. So we
wait to feel be er. But in doing so we hold ourselves back. Taking some
time to be alone can be reenergizing and recharging, but it can also
very easily become a downward spiral of rumination and self-loathing
that feeds depression and keeps it going.
Being with others (even when we don’t feel like it), to observe them,
interact with them and build connections with them, can help to li our
mood and pull us out of our own head and back into the real world. We
know from the research that good-quality social support is associated
with be er outcomes when it comes to mood (Nakahara et al., 2009).
Many of those people who never tell a soul when they’re struggling
ﬁrmly believe that presenting themselves as anything less than their
best would make them a burden to the people around them. But the
science suggests otherwise. Social support has positive e ects for both
the one receiving it and the one providing it (Inagaki et al., 2012). So,
when we are struggling and we want to pull ourselves up from low
mood, one of the most powerful things we can do is swim against that
strong tide that is pushing us towards isolation and loneliness. We must
not wait until we feel like it, because feeling like it doesn’t come ﬁrst,
the action must come ﬁrst. The feeling follows on a er. The more time
you spend making real connections with other people, the more you
will start to improve your mental health.

Spending time with other people doesn’t mean we have to talk about
how we feel. In fact, we don’t have to talk at all. Just be around people,
watch them, smile at them. Share whatever conversation you can
manage. Low mood and depression can make us feel uncomfortable
and anxious around people. We get concerned with how we might be
coming across. We tend to spend so much of our time criticizing
ourselves that we start to assume that others are judging us too. Can
you remember which thought bias this was?
Despite all the thoughts and feelings that hold us back from each
other, human connection is our inbuilt mechanism for resilience. When
we struggle, connection helps. Good-quality, safe connection. If that
can’t be found in family or friends, then professionals can provide that
until you are able to ﬁnd and create new, meaningful relationships in
your own life.

Chapter summary
Our mental health defence players provide the foundations of
good health. When we nurture them daily they pay us back
with interest.
If you do one thing today, make it exercise. Choose something
you enjoy and you increase your chances of keeping it going.
The relationship between sleep and mental health works both
ways. Prioritizing sleep will help your mental health, and
making changes to your day will a ect your sleep.
How you feed your brain inﬂuences how you feel. Traditional
Mediterranean, Japanese and Norwegian diets show beneﬁts
for mental health.
Human connection is a powerful tool for stress resilience.
Your relationships change your biology and psychology.

CHAPTER 6

Understanding motivation
As we build up the psychological toolkit with skills that help us manage
through life, it’s easy to imagine that motivation is one of those tools.
But motivation is not a skill. Neither is it a ﬁxed personality trait that
we are either born with or without.
So many of us know exactly what we need to do, we just really don’t
feel like doing it right now. And when later comes, we don’t feel like it
then either. Sometimes we can get all ﬁred up about a goal and things
start moving in the right direction. But a few days later that feeling
ﬁzzles out again and we’re back to square one.
Motivation that goes up and down is not a fault in the system. It’s
part of being human. It is a sensation that comes and goes just like our
emotions, so we can’t always rely on it to be there. But what does that
mean for our dreams and goals?
Your brain is constantly paying a ention to what is happening in your
body. It knows what is happening to your heart rate, your breathing,
your muscles, and it reacts to the information it receives, making
judgements about how much energy it should expend on the task in
front of you. This means we have more inﬂuence over those feelings
than we think. When we start to change what we are doing with the
body, it has an inﬂuence on the activity in the brain, which in turn
inﬂuences the feelings that are produced in the body. This is something
we can use to our advantage.
When we’re dealing with that ‘can’t be bothered’ feeling there are
two main prongs of a ack:

Learning how to cultivate that feeling of motivation and energy to
increase the chances of it appearing more o en.
Learning how to act in line with your best interests even when
motivation is absent. Developing the capacity to do what you need
to do, even when a part of you doesn’t feel like it.

Procrastination or anhedonia
I want to make a distinction here between procrastination and
anhedonia. Procrastination is something everyone does. It’s when we
put something o because the job we need to do triggers a stress
reaction, or some other feeling that is aversive. I have made hundreds
of educational videos for social media, but give me a video to make
that feels uncomfortable or di cult to get right and I will skirt around
the job all day, convincing myself that all those other things I am
ge ing done is me being productive. In fact, it’s usually me
procrastinating because the idea of making that particular video feels
di cult or uncomfortable that day.
Anhedonia is something di erent. This is when we stop taking
pleasure in the things that we used to enjoy. Anhedonia is associated
with a number of mental health problems, including depression. When
we feel that way, we start to question whether anything is worth the
e ort. Things that once brought joy start to feel meaningless. So we
stop doing the things that have the potential to li our mood because
we have no desire for them any more.
When you start to avoid something that is important or potentially
meaningful to you, the natural response is to wait until you feel like it
once again. You wait until you feel energized or motivated or ready.
The problem with this is that the feeling does not arrive spontaneously,
we need to create it through action. Doing nothing feeds the lethargy
and that ‘can’t be bothered’ feeling and makes it worse. Motivation is a
wonderful by-product of action. It’s that great feeling you get when
you are on your way out of the gym, not on your way in. It’s that

feeling of energy and momentum you get once you have started
something and your brain and body start to rise to the challenge for
you. Sometimes the feeling is ﬂeeting. At other times it lasts for much
longer. Much of that will depend on all the other factors that are either
working to foster it or squash it.
So when we start doing something, even when your ﬂat mood says, ‘I
don’t feel like it,’ we can trigger a biological and emotional shi . This
doesn’t mean that pu ing some music on or doing a single workout is
going to solve all your problems or change your life. But it sets in
motion a series of events that shi s your direction. If you start doing
that thing that you wish you felt like doing, you have more chance of
stimulating your brain in a way that brings about enjoyment or a sense
of motivation.
For someone who is struggling with depression, and su ering from
anhedonia as a part of that, the pleasure in activities and the
motivation to engage in them takes time to return and can be very up
and down for a long while. There is a period in which we have to grind,
doing things that ma er to us, even when we don’t feel like it, in order
to re-engage with the pleasure we used to feel.

Chapter summary
Motivation is not something you are born with.
The feeling that you are energized and want to do something
cannot be relied upon to always be there.
Mastering motivation is building the capacity to do what
ma ers most to you, even when a part of you does not feel
like it.
Procrastination is o en avoidance of stress or discomfort.
Anhedonia is when we no longer get a sense of pleasure from
the activities that we used to enjoy. This is o en associated
with low mood and depression.
If something ma ers to you and could beneﬁt your health,
don’t wait until you feel like it – do it anyway.

CHAPTER 7

How to nurture that
motivation feeling
Motivation is more than just a reason for doing something. When we
use that word in conversation, we o en mean a feeling of enthusiasm
or drive that ﬂuctuates just like any other. Some things nurture that
feeling, others ﬂa en it. What things do you do that are o en followed
by a feeling of motivation and energy?
Science tells us about the things that work for most people. But the
detail you can establish from looking at your own life with curiosity
adds signiﬁcant value. You cannot change something you are not aware
of. So spending time observing and documenting the thing you are
trying to tackle is hugely important and gives you the best chance of
generating that feeling of motivation more of the time.
Here are some things that invite that feeling to be present:

Move your body
Motivation does not come from a speciﬁc location in your brain. It is
not a ﬁxed part of your personality. It’s also not an essential tool that
we use to make us move. It is most o en a consequence of that
movement.
But what if you have no motivation to exercise? Perhaps the key to
making exercise a sustainable part of everyday life is to ﬁnd a form of
movement that you can begin even when your motivation is low.

Research shows that doing even small amounts of exercise is be er
than nothing, and anything more than your usual amount of movement
will help boost your willpower (Barton & Pre y, 2010). Find something
that feels easy. Something that brings you joy. Something that feels like
precious time out rather than another boring job that has to get done.
Add in friends, good music, and anything that helps you to look forward
to it each day, rather than dread it.
Adding in some form of exercise, however moderate, will pay you
back in feelings of motivation. You may have to use the strategy of
acting opposite to the urges, because you won’t feel like working out.
But the impact this simple action will have on that ‘can’t be bothered’
feeling for the rest of the day is unmatched. Make this one thing
happen and you are se ing yourself up to win.

Staying connected with the goal
In therapy we o en set goals with people and help them to work out
how they are going to achieve them. But the real work happens when
things slip o track. This is the point at which those without support
might be vulnerable to giving up. But we need to get to work using the
setback to strengthen the future. If we can be er understand what
caused the failure and that ge ing back on track is just part of the
process, then we are in a good position to predict when it could happen
again and steer around those challenges in the future.
I think one of the reasons that some of my clients say they feel so
much more motivated a er an appointment is because they have spent
time reconnecting with their goals. If that thing we are working on is
not fresh in our minds we can quickly lose momentum.
Whether you are working on improving mood or any other aspect of
your wellbeing, it is paramount that you stay connected with your goals
because they will demand constant nurturing. Return to them on a daily
basis. You can do this through journalling. It doesn’t have to be a hugely
time-consuming task. It can be one minute at the beginning of your

day, listing the one or two things you will be doing that day towards
your goal. Then, at the end of the day, writing a few lines to reﬂect on
your experience. This kind of task is easy to maintain because it doesn’t
require too much time – maybe a couple of minutes at most. But it
ensures that you are accountable to yourself every day and keeps you
focused on your goals.

Keep it small
Any big task will invite that ‘can’t be bothered’ feeling, so keep it small
and keep it focused. People transform their lives with therapy but that
doesn’t happen overnight. They don’t return to their second
appointment problem-free and with an entirely new mindset.
Individuals take home just one task at a time and focus on that. We can
only focus on one thing at a time and we only have limited ability to do
things that we don’t feel like doing.
But of course most of us don’t stick to this. We can see that life
needs an overhaul and we try to do one big transformation all at once.
We expect too much of ourselves and then fall into despair when we
burn out or give up. When that happens, we are less likely to try again.
When motivation for a long-term goal dips, it helps to have small
rewards along the way. Not so much external rewards, but internal
ones. That emotional pat on the back you provide for yourself when
you congratulate yourself for your e orts and acknowledge that it has
been worth it because you are heading in the right direction. Doing this
helps you to lean back into e ort, knowing that you are on the way
towards the changes you want to see.
When we acknowledge the progress and small victories along the
way, we start to recognize that our e orts can inﬂuence our world.
Feeling that we have agency in this way helps us to feel energized to
keep trying. This is a great reason to start small and develop new
habits, ensuring that each one gets embedded. Once you sustain the
habit of prioritizing your healthy behaviours, they will sustain you.

Resisting temptation
Sometimes we are trying to build motivation to help us take action. But
change can also demand the willpower to resist temptation and the
urges to do things that take us in the opposite direction to our goals.
I must have been around the age of three or four when I visited my
grandparents’ house and walked into the garden to ﬁnd my grandfather
using a garden strimmer. Something wasn’t working right, so he ﬂipped
the tool upside down and started pulling bits of grass out from between
the blades. He turned to me and said, ‘Whatever you do, do not press
that red bu on!’
I sat on the grass next to the red bu on on the side of the strimmer
and ﬁxed my gaze on it. Don’t press it. Don’t press it. I wondered if it
was one of those bu ons that gave a satisfying click when you pressed
it. Don’t press it. It looked really smooth along the top. Don’t press it.
Like a magnet, my hand reached out and pressed that red bu on. The
strimmer instantly responded with a loud noise as the blades swung
into action. As luck would have it, no ﬁngers were lost that day, but I
did learn a new curse word.
Focusing on the thing I was not supposed to do turned out not to be
a helpful strategy. So what does help when positive change demands
that we resist temptation? One of the biggest factors is managing
stress. The physiology of self-control is optimal when stress is low and
heart-rate variability is high. Heart-rate variability is a measure of the
variation in time between each heartbeat. So it tells us how much your
heart rate changes throughout the day. You might notice that when you
get out of bed in the morning your heart speeds up, or when you run
for the bus. Then it gradually comes back down again. This means your
body gears you up for action when needed and calms the body back
down to rest and recover. But when we are under lots of stress, heart
rate may remain high throughout the day (reduced variability).
When it comes to resisting temptation and maximizing our willpower,
we need that capacity to calm the body and mind. Anything that
increases stress is going to have a negative impact on our ability to

make wise choices for our future. Stress increases the likelihood that
we will instead act based on how we feel right now and sabotage our
goals. So if you are sleep-deprived, depressed, anxious or not eating
well, your heart-rate variability goes down, along with your chances of
sticking to your goals. Whether you are trying to give up smoking or
unhealthy foods, or just trying to regulate your emotions in healthier
ways, when it comes to relieving stress and increasing your capacity for
willpower, exercise is a top choice. It has both an immediate e ect and
a long-term impact (Oaten & Cheng, 2006; Rensburg et al., 2009).
So whatever change you are working on, increasing your level of
activity, even in a small way, is a great way of strengthening your
willpower to keep it up (McGonigal, 2012).
Another big player in managing stress and the ability to make wise
decisions is sleep. You only need one bad night’s sleep to struggle with
increased stress, trouble concentrating and low mood the next day.
Self-control takes energy and if you haven’t had enough sleep, your
brain has less access to that energy and becomes more vulnerable to
high stress reactions, squashing your capacity to control your actions.

Change your relationship with failure
Something that can zap motivation is the prospect of failure. But that
depends on the relationship we have with failure. If slipping up and
going o track means we engage in vicious self-a ack and relentless
self-criticism, we are likely to feel ashamed and defeated. If we
associate failure with unworthiness, then starting anything new is going
to feel overwhelming and procrastination will be front and centre. We
protect ourselves from the psychological threat of shame by
sabotaging the process before it gets started.
Shame is not as helpful for motivation as you might think. When we
get caught in self-criticism and shame, we feel inadequate, defective
and inferior. When we feel that way we want to hide, get smaller,
disappear. It produces urges to escape and avoid, rather than to dust

ourselves o and try again. In fact, it is so painful that it induces strong
urges to block that feeling, which is risky for anyone living with
addiction. So if we want to persist at something and feel motivated to
keep trying, we have to think carefully about how we respond to failure
along the way.
If there is ever resistance in therapy, it is when you explore the idea
of being self-compassionate. I hear things like, ‘I will lose my drive,
become lazy.’ ‘I would never achieve anything.’ ‘I can’t just let myself o
the hook like that.’ Most people are shocked and surprised to ﬁnd out
that self-criticism is more likely to lead to an increase in depression
rather than motivation (Gilbert et al., 2010). Self-compassion, on the
other hand, treating yourself with kindness, respect, honesty and
encouragement a er a failure, is associated with increased motivation
and be er outcomes (Wohl et al., 2010).
Try this: If we are not aware of our self-criticism and the impact
it is having on our fear of failure and motivation, then it is much
harder to change it. Use these prompts to reﬂect on the way
you talk to yourself a er a setback.

When you experience failure, what does your self-criticism sound
like?
What emotions are a ached to it?
Do you suppose that the failure reveals something about your
inadequacy or incompetence as a person?
Do you notice any shame or hopelessness associated with that?
What coping strategies tend to follow that self-criticism?
How does that impact on your original goals?
Think of a time when you failed at something and someone
responded to you with kindness and encouragement. How did that
feel? How did that help you to try again and succeed?

Toolkit: How to respond to failure with compassion and
accountability so you can get back on track

Bring to mind a recent memory of a failure or setback. Then work
through the following exercise.
1. Notice what emotions are brought up by that memory and where
you feel them in your body.
2. How did the self-criticism sound? What words and phrases came
up and how did they inﬂuence how you felt?
3. How did you then respond to the feelings?
4. Bring to mind someone that you love or respect. If they
experienced the same failure, how might you have responded to
them di erently? Why would you have shown them that respect?
5. How would you want them to perceive the setback in order to get
them back on track?

Chapter summary
While we can’t control the feeling of motivation, these are
things we can do to increase the chances of feeling it more
o en.
Physical movement cultivates feelings of motivation. Small
amounts are be er than nothing and can help build
momentum.
Staying connected with your goal helps to keep triggering
moments of increased motivation.
Small and consistent beats one-o grand gestures.
Learning to rest and replenish between stressful situations
helps to maximize willpower.
Shame is not as helpful for motivation as you might think.
Changing your relationship with failure will help your
motivation.

CHAPTER 8

How do you make yourself do
something when you don’t feel
like it?
No ma er how much we reduce our stress and cultivate motivation, it
can be ﬂeeting. It comes and goes. So we cannot rely on it to always be
there. And there will always be things that we will never feel like doing.
Tax returns, insurance renewals, taking the bins out. How do we make
those happen, even when a part of us would prefer not to?
Feelings are o en accompanied by urges. Those urges are
suggestions, nudges, persuasions telling us to try this or that to relieve
the discomfort that we feel or to seek the reward that we anticipate.
While those urges can be powerful, we don’t have to do what they say.

Opposite action
When we were children, my sisters and I would share a packet of Polo
mints and compete for who could go the longest without crunching the
mint – a challenge that is much more di cult than it sounds. The urge
to crunch the mints felt almost undeniable at the time. It demanded
intense concentration and focus. As soon as you got distracted and let
your guard down, your brain would take over on autopilot for you and
the mint was history.

If you try that game, what you notice is that your awareness focuses
on your experience. You get to observe the sensation of an urge. And
you get to create a gap between urge and action. Simply by paying
a ention, you get to choose whether you go with the urge or against it.
When the task is as simple as holding back from crunching a mint, all
you need is a bit of competitive sibling rivalry to keep you on task.
When we are trying to tackle much stronger urges toward ingrained
pa erns of behaviour that come along with intense emotional states,
the challenge is much harder.
The skill of acting opposite to an urge, to instead choose a behaviour
that is more in line with where you want to go, is a key skill that people
learn in therapy (Linehan, 1993). The opposite action skill is the
deliberate a empt to take an action that is the opposite of what the
emotion is telling you to do. This is especially helpful when your coping
strategies tend to cause you harm.
Mindfulness is a key component of this skill. Paying a ention to our
experience, and the thoughts, emotions and urges that come with it,
allows us to pause for just long enough to make an informed,
sometimes pre-planned decision about what to do next. This means we
can act based on our values rather than our emotions.

The pain barrier
The best strategy for motivation is to take motivation out of the
equation. There are things we do every day, whether we feel like it or
not. For example, in the morning, you don’t ask yourself whether you
have the motivation to clean your teeth, it’s just something you do. It is
a habit so well-practised that you don’t need to think about it any
more. You just do it. The reason for that is because it has been a nonnegotiable part of your daily routine for most of your life.
Imagine your brain is like a jungle. For every action that you take, the
brain has to make connections or pathways between di erent areas.
When you repeat an action on a regular basis over a long period of

time (like cleaning your teeth) those pathways become well-trodden
and established. Those smooth, wide paths become easier to access so
that your brain can do much of that action without you having to
consciously think too much about it.
But when you start something new you have to carve out a fresh
path, sometimes from scratch. That takes huge amounts of conscious
e ort. And if you don’t use that path o en enough, it will always be
e ortful. Any time that you are under stress your brain will
automatically choose the easiest route, which is the path well-trodden.
But if you can repeat that new behaviour as o en as you can, for
enough times, then a new habit is established and becomes easier to
use when you most need it.
Here are a few tips on how to establish a new habit:
Make the new behaviour as easy as possible to do, especially in
moments when you might not feel like taking action.
Set up your environment in a way that supports your new change
of behaviour. In the early stages of the change, you cannot rely on
habit.
Make clear plans and set reminders if necessary.
Add in a mix of short-term and longer-term rewards. Internal
rewards work be er than external ones. So we don’t need trophies
as much as we need that internal celebration and
acknowledgement that we are on the right track.
Get clarity on why you are making this change and why it ma ers
so much to you. You can use the values exercises in this book to
help with that (see page 286). Establish this change as a part of
your identity. This is how you do things now.

How to persist for the long-haul
Over the years, psychology research has challenged the idea that
success is all down to innate talents and has shown that grit
(Duckworth et al., 2007) and, in particular, perseverance play a vital

role in our ability to succeed (Crede et al., 2017). But how do we
achieve the kind of stamina that we need to be able to persevere even
in the face of setbacks?
Something that many people learn the hard way is that it doesn’t
mean just continuing to drive forward until you burn out. When we are
working on long-term goals and making changes that we want to
maintain, we have to learn to counter-balance the stress of e ort with
the replenishment of rest. We don’t need to always be working or
always feel energized and refreshed. We need to be able to listen to
the body and step back from e ort so that we are ready to drive
forward once again.
Just as elite athletes may nap in between training sessions and
professional singers rest their voices by going for days without
speaking, we need to recognize that regular rest and replenishment is
crucial if we want to persevere at anything for the long-haul.
But not all breaks are equal. Most days are broken up by those quiet,
sometimes boring moments in between periods of intense work and
e ort. But if we use those in-between moments to clear emails, scroll
through social media or get a few things done, the body and brain will
not be returning to a rest state to recharge. So the next time you reach
for your phone to ﬁll the 15 minutes between meetings, why not step
outside for some fresh air or ﬁnd a space to close your eyes for a
moment instead?
We also need to make use of small rewards as we work on big goals.
When we break down big challenges into smaller tasks and reward
ourselves for reaching those milestones, we get the beneﬁts of small
dopamine hits along the way. Dopamine not only gives us a li le ‘buzz’
that feels rewarding, it also drives us to look ahead to the next
milestone and motivates us to keeping driving forward. It enables us to
imagine how we might feel once we accomplish the challenge faced,
and triggers desire and enthusiasm (Lieberman & Long, 2019). So,
building in those small rewards along the way helps to refuel your
desire for the end goal and your capacity to persevere.

Let’s say you are trying to run further than you ever have. When you
start to feel tired, you tell yourself you are just going to get to the end
of this road. When you do, you mentally give yourself a pat on the back
for achieving it. You see it as a sign that you are on the right track. This
internal reward to yourself gives you a dopamine release. This
suppresses the noradrenaline that causes you to give up. As a result,
you get an extra boost to keep going for a bit longer. This is not the
same as positive self-talk. You focus on a small, speciﬁc goal and the
accomplishment of it means you are heading in the direction of your
ultimate goal (Huberman, 2021).
So, when the task ahead feels like a mountain to climb, you don’t look
up at the peak. You narrow your focus and set yourself the challenge to
make it to that next ridge. When you get there, you allow yourself to
absorb that feeling of being on your way. Then you go again.

Gratitude
A gratitude practice can be a powerful tool for longer-term goals that
demand persistent e ort. Turning your a ention towards gratitude selfgenerates those internal rewards that replenish and restore your
capacity to keep returning to the e ort that is required of you. A
simple shi of language can help us turn towards gratitude. For
example, try switching ‘I have to …’ with ‘I get to …’
As previously mentioned, we can also practise gratitude in a more
formal way by si ing down with pen and paper and writing down the
things that we feel grateful for each day. When we do that, we are
turning our a ention on purpose in a way that shi s our emotional
state. But it is not only that immediate impact on our emotions that we
gain. When we practise gratitude on a regular basis we are repeating an
action. As described previously, the more we repeat an action the
easier it becomes for the brain to do it with less e ort in the future.
Almost like a mental muscle, pu ing the reps in each day makes it

much easier to think in a helpful way when we might need to in the
future.

Pre-planning
In therapy we o en create crisis plans with people. Sometimes those
are about staying safe in life or death situations. At other times they
are to prevent relapse of addiction or ge ing o track with a goal at a
time when they might be vulnerable to giving up. You can make use of
this to improve your chances of sticking to any plan. Look ahead at the
change you want to make. Write down all the potential hurdles that
could cause you to get o track. For each hurdle, make a plan of action
about how you will prevent those hurdles from causing you to get o
track or give up on your goals. Engineer the situation in advance, to
make acting in line with your values and goals as easy as possible, and
sabotaging those goals based on emotional urges as di cult as possible.
For example, if you want to get up on time every day, put the alarm
clock just outside your room so that you have no choice but to get up.
If you can anticipate the situations that may be di cult and have a
plan in place to deal with them, you won’t have to think on your feet
and wrestle with temptation or motivation at a time when you may feel
vulnerable.

This is just who I am now – returning to
your identity
As motivation rises and falls along the journey of change, returning to
your sense of self and the identity you want to create can help you to
persist when motivation has disappeared. If you see yourself as
someone who looks a er their dental hygiene, you pick up the
toothbrush every day whether you feel like it or not, because it is just
what you do.

Our sense of identity does not have to be entirely ﬁxed by what is
laid out for us early in life. We continue to create and build on that
identity throughout life with everything we do. When our goals are
underlined by our intention to become the person we want to be, or
even be er, when we have decided that this is who we are now, then
we can act in line with that even on the days when motivation is low.
For more on how to steer your sense of identity, see Chapter 33 on
how to work out what ma ers.
Toolkit: Future self-memory and journalling improves your
chance of making be er choices

Spend time imagining your future. When we create a vivid image of
ourselves in the future, the easier it becomes to make choices in the
here and now that will beneﬁt your future (Peters & Buchel, 2010).
Think about yourself at a point in the future and how you might feel
about the choices you have made, what you said yes to and what you
said no to. How will those choices have a ected your life? Which of
your choices and actions do you think you will be most proud of? When
you reach that time in the future, what will you be focusing on? How
will you feel about your past self when you look back?

Pros and cons from Dialectical Behaviour
Therapy (DBT)
DBT is a psychological therapy that helps people to ﬁnd safe ways to
manage intense emotions. But the skills taught in DBT can be useful in
many aspects of life, including those days when we are trying to stay
on track with our goals but we don’t feel motivated. Here is one of
those skills.
While it is helpful to consider the future that we do want, it is also
helpful to look at the future we don’t want. In therapy some people
spend time exploring in detail the pros and cons of both staying the

same and working hard on change. You can use the table below to try
for yourself. It pays to spend time being honest with yourself about the
true extent of the cost of things remaining as they are. While change
inevitably has disadvantages (we may have to tolerate distress and
endure discomfort in our e orts), they may be outweighed by the price
we pay for staying as we are. This can be a valuable exercise to come
back to when we start to feel like giving up on a positive life change or
we get o track.

Change

Keeping things the same

Try this: Building on your identity with intention takes some
thought and conscious e ort. Try si ing down with pen and
paper to write out some answers to these questions. Be er still,
use a journal and keep coming back to your responses whenever
you are working on a life change.

What is the larger overall change that I am trying to make?
Why is this change so important to me?
What kind of person do I want to be as I face this challenge?
How could I approach this challenge in a way that would make me
feel proud when I look back on this period of my life, regardless of
the outcome?
What are those smaller goals that I need to achieve along the way?
How would I like to face those days when motivation is low?
Am I listening to my body and what it needs?

Chapter summary
We cannot rely on motivation to be there all the time.
We can practise acting in opposition to urges so that we can
act in line with our values rather than how we feel right now.
Repeat a new behaviour enough times and it will become
habit.
For any big goal, rest and replenishment along the way is vital
– just ask any elite athlete.
Make use of small rewards along the way.

CHAPTER 9

Big life changes. Where do I
start?
Sometimes you reach a moment in your life when you realize a change
is needed and you know exactly what that change is. But it doesn’t
always happen like that. More o en than not, we go through a period
of strain and discomfort. We start to recognize that things are not as
we would like them to be, but we can’t pinpoint exactly why or how we
can begin to make it be er.
This is where your incredible human brain comes into its own. In
chapter 3 we talked about metacognition. Our ability to not only
consciously experience the world, but to also then think about and
reassess the experience we had. This is a key life skill that we make use
of in therapy. It is the epicentre of any big life change. You cannot
change what you cannot make sense of.
Albert Einstein reportedly once said, ‘If I had an hour to solve a
problem, I’d spend ﬁ y-ﬁve minutes thinking about the problem and
ﬁve minutes thinking about solutions.’ This quote o en comes to mind
when I hear the common misconception that therapy consists of si ing
in a room and dwelling on your problems. It does involve thinking about
your problems, but there is method in that. The most e ective way to
resolve a problem is to understand the problem inside out.
So how do we use metacognition when we are facing big changes?
Building awareness begins with looking back. For anyone in therapy or
counselling, you can talk about things that have happened and get
useful prompts from the therapist to help you make sense of it. For

those who are using a self-help approach, journalling is a great place to
start. There is no pressure to write huge amounts or to write in a way
that makes sense to anyone else. The aim is to build on your ability to
reﬂect on your experiences and how you responded to them. For
example, let’s say you failed an exam, and in the moments a er ﬁnding
out, you called yourself a stream of unprintable names and told
yourself that you will never amount to anything. Metacognition
involves reﬂecting on those thoughts and how they further impacted
on your experience.
The power of using metacognition is that it opens up our ability to be
accountable to ourselves and to examine the part we play in staying
the same or making change. It reveals the big inﬂuence that seemingly
small behaviours can have, both positive and negative.
Journalling in this way can feel strange if we are used to glossing over
things without paying too much a ention to the details. But over time
those details can help us to build our awareness of our experience in
hindsight, as we start to spot the cycles and pa erns of behaviour in
the moment, as they happen. This is when we create the possibility of
choosing something di erent and making the positive changes that we
want for ourselves.
Try this: Use these journal prompts to help you explore the
problems you are tackling and practise the skill of thinking about
your thoughts.

Describe any signiﬁcant events that happened.
What thoughts did you have at the time?
How did that way of thinking impact on how you felt?
Describe any emotions you noticed.
What triggered those emotions?
What urges did you have?
How did you respond to the feeling?

What were the consequences of your response?

Chapter summary
It’s not always clear what we need to change and how to do
it.
You cannot change what you cannot make sense of.
Get to know your problem inside out to make it easier to
identify which way to go next.
Start by reﬂecting on situations a er they have happened.
Be ready to get honest with yourself about ways you may
contribute to the problem or keep yourself stuck.
Therapy supports you through this process. But if you don’t
have access to therapy, journaling can be a good place to
start.

CHAPTER 10

Make it all go away!
If you ever go to therapy, very early on the therapist will ask you what
you want from the process. Most people will include emotions in their
answer. They have some painful or unpleasant emotions that they want
to get rid of, and are missing out on some of the more enjoyable or
calm ones that they would like to feel again. And why wouldn’t they?
We all just want to be happy. They feel at the mercy of those painful
emotions and want them gone.
Far from making emotions go away in therapy, you learn to change
your relationship with them, to welcome them all, to pay a ention to
them, to see them for what they are, and to act in ways that will
inﬂuence them and change the intensity of them.
Emotions are neither your enemy nor your friend. They do not occur
because your brain has a few cogs misaligned or because you are a
sensitive soul, as you were told in the past. Emotions are your brain’s
a empt to explain and a ach meaning to what is going on in your
world and your body. Your brain receives information from your
physical senses about the outside world and from your bodily functions,
like your heart rate, lungs, hormones and immune function. It then uses
memory of these sensations that occurred in the past to make some
sense of them now. This is why the heart palpitations brought on by
too many cups of co ee can culminate in a panic a ack. The pounding
heart, faster breathing and sweaty palms all feel a bit familiar to that
time you had a panic a ack in the supermarket. The physical sensations
feel just like fear and your brain gets the message that all is not well,
which ramps up your threat response.

Wouldn’t it be great if we could wake up in the morning and just
decide what to feel that day? Enter love, excitement and joy, please!
Unfortunately it is not so simple. The opposite of this idea is that
emotions just pop up, with no trigger, and we have no control over
what happens or when it happens. All we can do is try to resist them,
block them out and be rational. But this is also not the case. While we
cannot directly trigger all emotions, we have much more inﬂuence over
our emotional state than we were ever taught to believe. This does not
mean that you are to blame for feeling emotional discomfort. It means
that we get to learn about the many ways we can take responsibility
for our own wellbeing and construct new emotional experiences.

What not to do with emotions
Push them away

Imagine you are at the beach. You walk into the sea up to your chest.
The waves need to pass over you to get to the shore. If you try to hold
the waves back and prevent them reaching the shore, you learn how
powerful those waves are. They push you back and you quickly get
engulfed and overwhelmed. But you don’t have to tumble and struggle
against the waves. Those waves are coming no ma er what. When you
accept that, you can focus on keeping your head above the water as it
passes. You still feel the e ects. Might even get li ed o your feet for a
moment. But you move with the water and brace yourself ready to land
back on your feet.
Dealing with emotion is much the same as standing in the waves.
When we try to stop feelings in their tracks, we easily get knocked o
our feet and ﬁnd ourselves in trouble, struggling to catch a breath and
work out which way is up. When we allow the emotion to wash over us,
it rises, peaks and descends, taking its natural course.

Believe they are facts

Emotions are real and valid, but they are not facts. They are a guess. A
perspective that we try on for size. An emotion is the brain’s a empt
to make sense of the world so that you can meet your needs and
survive. Given that what you feel is not a factual statement, neither are
thoughts. That is partly why therapies like CBT (Cognitive Behavioural
Therapy) can be so helpful to many people. It gives us practice at being
able to step back from thoughts and feelings and see them for what
they are – just one possible perspective.
If we know that thoughts and feelings are not facts but they are
causing us distress, it makes sense to check it out and see whether it is
a true reﬂection of reality or whether an alternative would be more
helpful. When we treat our current thoughts and emotions as facts, we
allow them to determine our thoughts and actions of the future. Then
life becomes a series of emotional reactions rather than informed
choices.
So how do we stop buying into thoughts as if they are facts? We ask
questions. Something that therapy gives us practice at is being curious
about experiences in both our inner world and the world around us.
Individuals sit down opposite me and start talking about the things they
got wrong that week, and feelings they shouldn’t have had, stepping
into the old habit of self-criticism and self-loathing. Then we shi our
perspective to a bird’s-eye-view. We look at how those behaviours ﬁt
our formulation. We shi into curiosity, where there is no need for selfa ack. So, whether it has been a great week or a hard one, we learn
and grow.
Holding curiosity allows us to look at our mistakes and learn, when
they might otherwise be too painful to acknowledge. Holding curiosity
brings with it a sense of hope and energy for the future. Whatever
happens, we’re always learning.
Toolkit: Examine your coping strategies

What are the ﬁrst signs for you that emotional discomfort is
present?
Is it a behaviour? Do you recognize your blocking or protective
behaviours?
Where do you feel the emotion in your body?
What thoughts are there? What beliefs are you buying into about
this situation? What e ect is that having on you?
Try writing down those thoughts and narratives.
What can they tell you about what you are afraid of?
What behaviours tend to follow a strong emotion?
Do those behaviours help you in the short-term?
What is their longer-term impact?
Ask a trusted friend to go over the story with you and help you
identify any biases or misunderstandings. Explore with them the
di erent perspectives you might have.

Chapter summary
Emotions are neither your enemy not your friend.
We have more inﬂuence over our emotional state than we
were ever taught to believe.
Pushing emotion away can cause more problems than
allowing it to wash over us and take its natural course.
Emotions are not facts but are one possible perspective.
If there is painful emotion, get curious, ask questions. What
can they tell you?

CHAPTER 11

What to do with emotions
If you have skipped straight to this chapter, you may be looking for the
answer to emotional pain. What is that thing to make it all go away?
Well, if that is you, bear with me. Please don’t close the book just yet,
but I am about to tell you the opposite of what you’re probably hoping
to hear.
Somewhere in the middle of clinical training, we had an introduction
to mindfulness. You might think that a bunch of trainee clinical
psychologists would be open-minded enough to sit and learn patiently.
But the room was full of giggles as we all tried to sit in silence and
notice what we felt. Clinical training is all about doing, ge ing things
done. We were all ﬁrmly in ‘doing mode’. To shi into just being was
proving a challenge for everyone in the room, much to the teacher’s
annoyance. At the time, I admit I was full of judgements about how I
couldn’t see myself using this or teaching it to anyone.
But it was part of the programme, so I had to try it out. As training
progressed and became more stressful, I found myself in the midst of
assessment season with a thesis to write and exams looming. Tension
was high. One of my favoured tools for stress management at the time
was running. I took a break from the desk and went out for a run
through the local countryside. My head was buzzing with to-do lists
and fears about ge ing everything done and ge ing it right. I had
another go at using mindfulness, this time while I was moving.
I followed a long gravel track through the woods and listened to the
sound of my feet hi ing the stones. I allowed the feelings of anxiety
and stress to be with me. I didn’t try to push them away. I didn’t try to

plan or problem-solve. Every few seconds my mind would be o , telling
me about the things I should be doing instead of this, o ering up worstcase scenarios of missing deadlines, failing assignments and an email I
needed to send when I got back home. Every time, I let the thoughts
come. And every time, I let them pass behind me and returned to the
sound of my feet on the gravel. I must have gone through this process a
thousand times. Distract, pull back. Distract, pull back. On the way back
home, as I approached the end of the track, it hit me. I realized what it
was that all the academic texts were struggling to convince me of. I still
had all the same hurdles to face. But I wasn’t ﬁghting against the
tension. I was allowing it to pass – so that is what it did.
The idea of welcoming all emotional experience feels almost
alarming at ﬁrst. It is the opposite of what many of us are taught to do
with feelings. We are taught that feelings are the opposite of
rationality. Something to be squashed down and hidden, pushed to the
back of your mind, unspoken. But allowing them to rise up, and even
welcoming it?
Many of us fear emotions – that is, until we begin allowing ourselves
to experience them and understand that they all rise and fall like
waves.
Mindfulness enables us to use the tool of awareness. Awareness
sounds very basic and rather vague but it’s the tool we never know we
need until we use it. Switching o the autopilot and building awareness
of thoughts, emotions, urges and actions adds in an amber light before
the green light ﬂashes and we act on an urge or emotion. It o ers us
the chance to consciously pause where autopilot may have driven us
forward. So we give ourselves more chance to make di erent choices
based on our values rather than simply responding to emotion.
As an artist works closely on a small detail of a large painting, she will
occasionally take a step back and check that each new action ﬁts in
with the vision she has for the whole picture. The metacognition tool
of pausing between emotion and action is that same process of
stepping back, even just for a moment, to check in with your thoughts
and actions to see if they will be in line with the person you want to be.

The ability to check in on the bigger picture, even for the smallest of
moments, can have a powerful impact on the way we live life.
As the river of constant thoughts ﬂows, we get to put our head
above water and check those thoughts are heading in the direction we
want to move in. We can consider that direction in the context of our
meaning and purpose, and not just move with the ﬂow because that is
the way it naturally goes.

See emotions for what they are
Seeing emotions for what they are is key to being able to process them
in a healthy way. You are not your feelings and your feelings are not
who you are. The sensation of an emotion is an experience that moves
through you. Each emotion can o er you information, but not
necessarily the whole story. If there is something emotions are pre y
useful for, it’s telling you what you need. When we allow ourselves to
feel emotion without blocking it out or pushing it away, we can turn
towards it with curiosity, and learn.
Discovering what we need is even more valuable if we then use that
information to do what is necessary and meet those needs. I think it is
always useful to start with the physical. As we discussed in previous
chapters, no amount of therapy or psychological skills is going to
overturn the destructive impact of poor sleep or diet and lack of
physical activity. Once we start taking care of the body we live in, we
are already well on the way to being able to work on the rest.

Pick a name
When you feel something, give it a name. Learn lots of names for lots
of emotions. We don’t only feel happy, sad, fearful or angry. We feel
vulnerable and ashamed, bi er and grateful, inadequate and excited.
In therapy a lot of work is put into this. Notice what you feel, notice
where you feel it in your body, and label it. It is common for people to

recognize the physical sensations, but have no idea what that emotion
is; perhaps a legacy of past teachings that we don’t talk about
emotions. Nobody needed a name for each di erent emotion because
they never voiced it out loud. But they were able to pick out the
physical manifestation of it because it has always been more acceptable
to tell someone you feel sick and have a pounding heart, than to say
you feel vulnerable and insecure.
Increasing your emotional vocabulary so that you can distinguish
ﬁnely between di erent emotions helps you to regulate those emotions
and choose the most helpful responses in social situations (Kashdan et
al., 2015).

Self-soothing
When painful emotions become intense, it’s very easy to say they will
rise, peak and descend, but the reality of that experience can be
excruciating, and lead to strong urges to do unhealthy or even
dangerous things to make it all disappear sooner.
While some self-help books might tell you that you can just think
positive thoughts to change how you feel, I would say that’s going to be
a struggle. Trying to change how you think is hard enough when you
are feeling ﬁne. Trying to change the thoughts that arrive at the height
of distress feels nearly impossible. When we are overwhelmed, the best
strategy is to step back and be mindful of that emotion as much as
possible, see it as a temporary experience, and to turn down the dial on
our threat response by soothing our way through it.
In a therapy called Dialectical Behaviour Therapy (DBT) we teach
individuals how to soothe their way through distressing emotions with
simple skills that help you to ride the wave until it comes back down.
These are called distress tolerance skills. One of those skills is called
self-soothing (Linehan, 1993).
Self-soothing is any set of behaviours that help you to feel safe and
soothed as you experience a painful emotion. When your threat

response is triggered, the message being received by your brain is, ‘We
are not safe! All is not OK! Do something about this now!’ If we want
that distressing emotion to stop escalating and start its process of
coming back down to baseline, we need to feed our body and brain
new information that we are safe. There are lots of ways we can do
this, because your brain takes its information from each of your senses.
That means you can use each of those to send messages to your brain
that you are safe. Your brain also takes its information from the physical
state of your body, including your heart rate, breathing rate and muscle
tension. This is why physical experiences that relax muscles, such as a
warm bath, can be e ective in contributing to ge ing you through
distress.
Other self-soothing ideas include:
A warm drink
A chat with a trusted friend or loved one
Physical movement
Calming music
Beautiful images
Slow breathing
Relaxation techniques
A scent or perfume you associate with safeness and comfort
One of the quickest ways to tell your brain that you are safe is actually
through your sense of smell. Finding a scent that you associate with
safety or comfort, maybe the perfume of a loved one or a lavender
scent that you ﬁnd calming, can be helpful in helping you to focus the
mind and calm the body at the same time. For those who struggle with
distressing emotions when out in public, here’s an example. A popular
choice in therapy has been to carefully unstitch a so toy, ﬁll it with
lavender, and sew it back up. Then whenever you are out in public and
start to feel overwhelmed, you can breathe in the scent and ground
yourself, soothe yourself through it without anyone even noticing.

A great tool that is o en used in DBT is to create self-soothing
boxes. The reason this is such a great idea is that when you are in
emotional pain, at the height of your distress, your brain is set up to
bypass your problem-solving capabilities. If you are under threat, you
don’t have time to think things through. This is when your brain makes
a quick guess for you and acts on impulse. A self-soothing box is
something you prepare in advance, when you are able to think through
what most helps in times of distress. Grab an old shoe box and ﬁll it
with anything that could help to soothe you when you are in distress.
As described above, anything that you associate with feelings of safety
and comfort is great to include. I have a self-soothing box in my
therapy room that I use as an example. Inside that box is a note to call
a particular friend. Seeking help may not be our ﬁrst thought when we
are struggling, but following a simple instruction to call a trusted friend
can steer us in the right direction. As we know from previous chapters,
human connection helps us to recover from stress more quickly. Other
things that I included in my self-soothing box are a pen and pad of
paper. If you cannot bring yourself to talk, then expressive writing has
been shown to help us to process emotion and make sense of what is
happening.
The box could also include lavender oil (or any scent that you
associate with comfort), some photographs of people who care about
you and whom you care about, and a list of soothing or upli ing music
tracks to play. Carefully chosen music can have a powerful impact on
our emotional state. Create a playlist of tracks that will help you to feel
calm, safe and soothed when you are distressed.
My box also includes a teabag, because in England we associate tea
with comfort and connection. Including something like this in the box is
simply a clear instruction to follow when you might otherwise be
struggling to think through what you need.
Crucially, keep that box somewhere that is easy to ﬁnd when you
might need it. This tool is all about making things easier for you to cope
in the way that you want to during the toughest of times, to help you

stay away from the less than healthy habits when you are vulnerable to
using them.

Chapter summary
You are not your feelings and your feelings are not who you
are.
The sensation of emotion is an experience that moves
through you.
Each emotion can o er you information but not necessarily
the whole story.
If there is something emotions are useful for, it’s telling us
what we need.
When you feel something, give it a name. Try to label
emotions with more detail than just happy or sad.
Allow emotions to be present and soothe your way through,
rather than blocking them out.

CHAPTER 12

How to harness the power of
your words
The language we use can have powerful e ects on our experience of
the world. It is our tool for making sense of things, helping us to
categorize sensations, learn from past experiences, share that
knowledge and predict and plan for future experiences.
Some words for emotions have gradually been used more and more
to mean di erent things, until they have taken on broad and vague
meanings. ‘Happy’ has become an umbrella term for anything positive,
to the extent that nobody really knows if what they are feeling
qualiﬁes as ‘happy’. If I feel passionate, am I happy? If I feel calm and
content, am I happy? If I feel inspired and energized, is that happy?
The same has happened to words like depression. What is a
depressed mood, exactly? Sadness? Emptiness? Agitation? Numbness?
Uneasiness? Restlessness? Flatness?
And does any of this really ma er? Well, as it turns out, it does.
Having fewer concepts or words to di erentiate discrete negative
emotions is associated with higher levels of depression a er stressful
life events (Starr et al., 2020). Those who are able to distinguish
between negative feelings tend to be more ﬂexible in how they
respond to problems. For example, they are less likely to binge drink
under stress, are less reactive to rejection and show less anxiety and
fewer depressive disorders (Kashdan et al., 2015). This does not mean
that those things are caused by the di culties in distinguishing

between negative feelings, but it does show that we have a powerful
tool that we can use to help us through di cult times.
The more new words you can build up to di erentiate between
feelings, the more options your brain has for making sense of various
sensations and emotions. When you have a more accurate word for a
feeling, this helps to regulate your emotions and in turn means less
stress for your body and mind overall. This is a crucial tool if you want
to be more ﬂexible and e ective in how you respond to challenges that
you face (Feldman Barre , 2017).
The good news is that this is a skill we can all keep building upon.
Here are some ideas for how to build up your emotional vocabulary.
Get speciﬁc. When you feel something, try to go beyond ‘I feel
awesome,’ or ‘I’m not happy.’ What other words can you use to
describe this feeling? Is it a combination of feelings? What physical
sensations do you notice?
One emotion label may not be enough to encapsulate this feeling.
Is it a combination of feelings? For example, ‘I feel nervous and
also excited.’
There is no right or wrong way to label an emotion. The key is to
ﬁnd a description that you and the people around you can become
familiar with. If you can’t ﬁnd the words, you can make up your
own or ﬁnd words from other languages that don’t have a clear
translation.
Explore new experiences and play around with ways to describe
those experiences. From tasting new foods, to meeting new
people, reading books or visiting somewhere new. Each new
experience o ers the opportunity to view things from a di erent
perspective.
When it comes to building up the ability to describe those new
experiences, take every opportunity to learn new words. This does
not have to only come from books (although it can). It can also
come from music, movies and any other place that exposes you to
new words to describe how you feel.

Write down experiences and explore ways to describe how you
felt. If you o en feel at a loss for words when trying to describe
how you feel, and need help to build up your emotional
vocabulary, the Feeling Wheel (Willcox, 1982) is a great resource
that is o en used in therapy for exactly this purpose. You can keep
a copy in the cover of your journal and use it to ﬁnd more speciﬁc
words. You can also use the blank spaces to add in your own words
as you come across them in other places.

Figure 7: Use the Feeling Wheel (Wilcox, 1982) to help you
ﬁnd the words to describe how you feel.

Don’t only focus on the negative emotions
Journalling is a helpful way to process and understand the experiences
and emotions that happen to you. But journalling is not only helpful for
making sense of di cult experiences. It’s also important to spend time
writing about positive experiences, even small moments that felt

positive. This is because every action is a speciﬁc pa ern of neural
activity in the brain. When you repeat an activity over and over, that
neural pathway is strengthened and becomes easier for your brain to
access. So if you want to be able to more easily cultivate positive
feelings, thoughts and memories, put in the practice by keeping a
journal. When you get practise at cultivating certain feelings and
experiences in this way, it gets easier to access those feelings in the
future.

Chapter summary
The language we use has a powerful e ect on our experience
of the world.
The more words you have to describe how you feel, the
be er.
If you don’t have the words you can use something like the
Feeling Wheel to give you prompts.
Notice the words others use, read books and explore the
ways you can keep building your emotional vocabulary.

CHAPTER 13

How to support someone
If you are supporting a loved one as they struggle with their mental
health, it is quite possible that you feel completely inadequate. You
don’t know how to ﬁx it, you’re not sure what is the right thing to say.
You want to make it all OK for them. But you can’t. So you feel lost,
desperately wanting to help and not knowing how.
When someone we love is su ering, sometimes the stress that it
brings up can give us the urge to escape how we feel about their pain.
But when we do that, we can feel even more helpless and paralyzed
because we stop ourselves from providing even some low-level support
that could help us to feel more conﬁdent in the supporting role (Inagaki
et al., 2012).
While there are no hard and fast rules for supporting someone
through mental health problems, there are a few things that can help
along the way.
1. When we focus on trying to ﬁx the problem, it is easy to
underestimate the power of simply being there. Most people don’t
want to be told what to do. But they do want someone to keep
showing up to check in and show they care.
2. If the loved one has a speciﬁc diagnosis, it can help to learn about
how it a ects them and get more speciﬁc advice on the challenges
they are facing.
3. Don’t forget that the person you are supporting will have an idea
of what they need. So asking them how they would like you to

support them can help to give you guidance, while also
communicating to them that you are listening.
4. Caring for someone can put a strain on your own mental health.
But you cannot support them at your best if your mental health
starts to deteriorate. So it is absolutely imperative that you
prioritize your own health too – even in small ways. Keep a close
eye on the basics. Keep track of your sleep, routine, nutritional
intake, exercise and social contact.
5. Get your own support. Whether it be someone you trust, a
support group or a professional, having a safe space to talk about
your own feelings and think about how to move forward can help
to stop you burning out.
6. Set boundaries. Supporting someone else does not mean that your
life no longer ma ers. Ge ing clarity on your own values can help
to keep you going when things get tough, but also to ensure that
you can maintain some balance.
7. Work on a crisis plan. If the person you are caring for ever feels
unsafe, then it is important to have a crisis plan. It doesn’t need to
be complex. Acknowledge any early warning signs that things may
be deteriorating and list the things that both of you can do to
ensure everybody’s safety in that scenario. Having a wri en plan
with all the numbers you need to call makes it easier to do what
you need to in a crisis.
8. It is easy to underestimate the power of listening with compassion,
kindness and curiosity. The problems may not disappear when you
do that, but you are helping that person to feel cared for and less
alone, which greatly improves their chances of recovery. Social
support is a powerful tool and it does not need to come with all
the answers, just a big dose of compassion.
9. Supporting someone does not mean that you have to connect with
big, intense conversations. Human connection in the smallest of
moments ma ers. Walking while you are talking can help those
who feel uncomfortable with opening up. You can also say nothing
at all. Simply spending time together, even in silence, is OK. By

being there, you are helping them to feel less alone and more
cared for.
10. If you are trying to help that person open up about their struggles,
using open questions that ask for more than a yes or no answer
can help. For example, rather than ‘Are you OK?’ try ‘What are you
thinking?’
11. Listen carefully. Don’t o er advice unless they ask for it. Just reﬂect
back what you hear them saying; let them know they are being
heard and respected.
12. If that person talks about feeling hopeless or helpless, says that
they cannot see a way out, or you become concerned about their
safety, always seek professional advice.
13. Don’t underestimate the power of practical help. If someone is
facing struggles with mental health, physical health, pre- and postnatal periods, or grief, all of these can make the usual day-to-day
tasks more di cult. For example, helping someone to eat a few
healthy meals each week by turning up with a home-made dinner
is a great way to support a loved one.
14. Being sensitive to situations in which your loved one may feel
especially vulnerable (or asking them if you don’t know) means
that you can be there for them when they most need it. For
example, if a loved one is recently bereaved and has to a end a
social function alone for the ﬁrst time, don’t avoid them. Lean in
and show them love and kindness. Those situations will still be
hard, but feeling less alone can mean everything.
15. It’s OK to change the subject. Being around someone does not
mean you have to focus on their struggles the whole time.
Distraction can be a welcome relief that they might ﬁnd di cult to
achieve when alone.
16. Have no expectations about their healing or recovery. It is never
smooth and linear. There will be good days and bad days. Being
surrounded by loved ones who are accepting of those ups and
downs over the years will help them to do the same.

17. Be honest. If you want to be supportive but you are not sure how,
say that out loud. Ask the person to let you know if you are saying
or doing something that is not helpful. This openness allows
everyone to feel less anxious and to truly connect, knowing that
the situation is working for everyone.

Chapter summary
It is normal to feel overwhelmed or inadequate when
supporting someone with mental health problems. You want
to ﬁx it but you don’t know how.
Leaning in to support someone who is su ering can be
stressful as you don’t want to say the wrong thing. But don’t
avoid them.
You don’t have to ﬁx everything to be a great support.
Look a er yourself to prevent burnout. Get your own support
and set clear boundaries.
Never underestimate the power of listening.

CHAPTER 14

Understanding grief
We o en associate grief with the death of a loved one. But we can
grieve at other times too. Endings that feel signiﬁcant to us can trigger
a grief reaction – even if the ending was not caused by death.
We have fought our way through a pandemic that changed our lives.
Along the way we lost friends, family, livelihoods, jobs, family
businesses built over generations. We lost ﬁnancial security, ﬁnal
moments with loved ones, and precious time to hold and be close to
them. We lost a sense of certainty about what the future holds, and
access to the social support that would help us cope with that. The
profound losses experienced by so many have changed the world and
le a psychological fallout that is heavy with grief.
For anyone feeling the e ects of a loss, these are some things to
remember.

Grief is normal
I have met so many people who tell themselves that they are failing at
life because they are struggling to cope with grief. They make broad
judgements about their strength of character, as if grief is a disorder or
a problem they should have ﬁxed. Grief is a normal part of human
experience. It is a necessary process to go through when we
experience the loss of someone or something that we loved, needed,
felt connected to and that held meaning in our life.

Sadness can be a part of grief. But there is much more to grief than
sadness. It can be a deep yearning for the person who is gone.
Relationships are at the core of what it means to be human. Among the
people I have met in my career so far, their human connections have
been the most meaningful aspects of their lives. When the relationship
ends, the need for that connection doesn’t stop.
Your body grieves too. As explained in previous chapters, everything
we think and feel happens within the body. Grief is no di erent. The
loss of a loved one is a huge psychological and physical threat. The pain
can feel both emotional and physical. The stress response is repeatedly
triggered.
In talking about things that help us through grief, let’s be clear on
what help means. Things that help do not make the pain disappear or
make us forget or force us to let go. Help might be as simple as ﬁnding
out that the rollercoaster of emotions you feel is normal. It might be
ﬁnding new ways to sit with and process the pain in a safe and healthy
way.
Grief can feel intolerable. It makes absolute sense that our most
natural human response to that might be to block it out. The pain is so
intense and vast that it is terrifying. So we push it away if we can. But
when we block one emotion, we tend to block them all. We can be le
feeling hollow, numb and struggling to ﬁnd meaning and to engage with
life in the way we once did.
If we ﬁnd a way to push it all down under the surface, maybe by
keeping really busy, numbing ourselves with alcohol or with denial of
what has happened, we may feel like we’re doing OK. Then something
small that seems insigniﬁcant blows the lid o and this world of pain
explodes, leaving us in shock and questioning whether we can cope.
Unresolved grief is associated with depression, suicidality and alcohol
abuse (Zisook & Lyons, 1990). So denying our grief and pushing it away
feels like self-protection but in the longer term can be the opposite.
How easy it is to say all this. How hard it is in reality to experience it.
When we block out pain, it is for good reason. An ocean of grief as
deep as it is wide, it feels too big, too much, never-ending. How do we

possibly face something like that? We can start by understanding what
to expect. We can also make sure we get to know what helps us
navigate the experience. Then we take things one experience at a time.
We take a few strides into that ocean of grief. We feel it. We breathe.
We step back and rest for a moment. Over time we learn to take more
steps, go deeper, immerse ourselves, knowing that we can safely return
to the shore. Feeling the grief does not make it disappear. But we build
up our strength to know that we can be reminded and yet still return to
engage with life as it is today.

Chapter summary
Endings that feel signiﬁcant can trigger a grief reaction – even
if the end was not caused by death.
Grief is a normal and natural part of being human.
The pain can feel both emotional and physical.
Things that help do not make the pain disappear or force you
to let go.
Trying to completely block out grief can lead to problems
further down the line.

CHAPTER 15

The stages of grief
You might have heard about the stages of grief as originally described
by Elisabeth Kubler-Ross (1969). Since then, it has been established that
they are not experienced in stages and they do not happen in any
particular order or time-frame. But they do describe some of the most
common experiences that can be a part of normal, healthy grief. It is
important to remember that these are not a prescription for how you
should be grieving. They are not a rule book for the best type of
grieving. They are descriptions of experiences you might notice along
the way. So if you recognize any of them in your own experience, or in
a loved one, you know these are a part of normal, healthy grief.
Denial

Denial and shock can help us survive the overwhelming pain of grief.
It does not mean that we deny any of it is happening. But there may
be a gradual pacing of how you take on board the situation you are
facing and the new reality that awaits you, whether you chose it or
not. Over time, denial begins to fade and this allows new waves of
emotion to surface.
Anger

Underneath anger is o en intense pain or fear. When we allow
ourselves to truly feel that anger and express it, we can bring those
other emotions to the surface and work on them. But many people
have been taught to fear anger and to feel ashamed of expressing it.
So we hold it under the surface, but like holding air under water, it

soon bubbles up in another time or place. An outburst at a friend or
doctor or family member that appears out of character.
Anger is there to agitate us to move and make something happen.
When we experience anger about something that we cannot control,
using physical movement helps us to use that physiological arousal in
the way it was designed to be used. Venting in that way can be
helpful to use up that energy generated by anger and bring ourselves
back down to baseline, at least for a while. Once the body is calm,
you are then more able to access the cognitive function necessary to
get clarity on your thoughts and feelings or any problem-solving to
be done. It can be helpful to do that with a trusted friend or loved
one who can support you, or by writing things down. We know from
the research that ruminating alone on angry feelings can make the
anger and aggression more intense rather than less (Bushman, 2002).
Trying to do any sort of deep relaxation exercise before you have
used physical action to move through the anger and bring your level
of arousal back down may be too di cult. But once you have
expressed it in any way that best suits you, using guided relaxations
can be helpful to replenish the body and mind until the next wave of
anger arrives.
Bargaining

Maybe this occurs in ﬂeeting moments. Maybe it’s hours or days
spent ruminating over the ‘What if …’ and ‘If only …’ thoughts. This
can easily lead down a path towards self-blame. We start to wonder
what could have been di erent if we had made di erent choices at
di erent times. We may start bargaining with a god, if we have one,
or the universe. Or maybe we promise to do things di erently from
now on and devote our life to making things be er in some way,
trying desperately in our mind to make it all OK again. We just want
things back the way they were.
Depression

The word depression here is used to describe that deep loss, an
intense sadness and emptiness, that follows a er a bereavement.
This is a normal reaction to loss and does not necessarily indicate a
mental illness. Depression is a normal response to a depressing
situation. Sometimes people around us can feel frightened by it and
naturally want to ﬁx it or cure it, or worse, want you to snap out of it.
But recognizing depression as a normal part of healthy grief means
that we can try to soothe ourselves through that pain and work hard
to re-engage with normal life and look a er our wellbeing as much as
we can. The ideas and tools covered in Section 1 still apply here. But
we also don’t have to deny pain, or push it down and hide it, as I will
explain later.
Acceptance

When we give grief the time and space it needs, we begin to feel
more able to step forward and play an active part in life again.
Acceptance can be misunderstood as agreeing with or liking the
situation. That is not true. In acceptance, the new reality is still not
OK. It is still not as we want it to be. But we begin to take on the
new reality, listen to our needs, open up to new experiences and
make connections.
It is also important to point out that acceptance is not an end
point in grief. It might be ﬂeeting moments in which you have found
a way to live in this new reality. There may be other moments when
you return to bargaining and yearning for that person. Going back
and forth between these states is normal, and it’s to be expected as
you face all the new challenges and experiences in your life. This
means if you have started to ﬁnd new moments of contentment or
joy, things seem to be going OK, and then you ﬁnd yourself
overwhelmed with a wave of anger or sadness (or anything else),
that does not mean you have gone backwards. You are not ge ing
grief ‘wrong’. Grief comes in waves that we can’t always predict.

Chapter summary
Denial can help us survive the overwhelming pain of grief. As
denial fades, this allows new waves of emotion to surface.
When we experience anger about something we can’t control,
using physical movement helps us to use the physiological
arousal and bring the body back down to calm for a while.
Ruminating over the What ifs can easily lead down a path of
self-blame.
Depression is a normal reaction a er a bereavement.
Acceptance is not the same as liking or agreeing with the
situation.

CHAPTER 16

The tasks of mourning
So how do we begin to get through this intense, confusing and o en
chaotic experience that we call grief?
William Worden (2011) described what he thought were the four
tasks of mourning.
1. To ﬁnd some acceptance in the new reality a er the loss.
2. To work through the pain of grief.
3. To adjust to an environment in which that loved one is missing.
4. To ﬁnd a way to keep a connection with them in a new way while
also engaging in life as it is now.
A er a loss, people deal with their grief in di erent ways. While some
are oriented towards feeling the pain and emotions that arise, others
focus on trying their best to distract themselves from the
overwhelming emotions. Neither of these are wrong. In fact, we need
both. We cannot work through grief all in one go and feel that much
emotional pain without rest. But we cannot do the work through grief
without allowing ourselves the space to feel it. So the work becomes a
process of movement between feeling the pain and replenishing the
body and mind with something distracting or comforting that allows
you a break between the waves of emotion (Stroebe & Schut, 1999).
So spending time with the emotions that come up (whether you
made an active choice to go there, by looking in a memory box or
visiting a memorial, or if that emotion rose up without choice) is a
necessary part of that process. It allows the feelings to unfold and be
expressed, through talking, writing, or weeping. When you feel you

need to step back from that, it helps to turn your a ention to
something that brings the stress response back down. Using the selfsoothing skills from Section 3 can be helpful (see page 109), especially
when the pain has been overwhelming. Grounding techniques may also
be helpful here. But there is no set prescription, as every individual,
every relationship and therefore every grieving process is unique. The
key is to ﬁnd something safe that allows you some time for restoration,
even if that time is short.
One of the problems with the ‘trying to get on with it’ mode and not
allowing ourselves to focus on the loss at any point is that it can take
relentless e ort, and there is no break from that. We might then need
to stay busy for fear of being overwhelmed if we press pause. So we
become stuck. We’re not able to rest because the work of keeping the
pain at arm’s length is constant. When pain is vast, the actions we take
to push it down and keep it under the surface can cause damage to
both the individual and their relationships. If you disconnect with one
emotion, you disconnect from them all.

Feel whatever is there
It is OK, when you are grieving, to feel everything. It is OK to feel
despair. It is OK to feel rage. It is OK to feel confused. It is also OK to
feel joy. It is OK to smile if that is where the moment takes you. It is OK
to enjoy the warm sun on your face for a moment, or laugh at
someone’s joke. It is all OK. It is normal to feel guilty when you start to
allow yourself to live again, but allowing small moments of joy to wash
over you is just as important to the process of grieving as allowing the
pain to. Over time we learn to engage with life and recognize that does
not mean forge ing. The love and connection continues.

Small steps forward every day

Do not underestimate the power of the smallest steps forward. If
standing upright and washing your face every day feels like a ba le,
then let washing your face each morning become the current goal.
Meet each chapter from where you are and push it where it moves.

No expectations
Expectations about how you should feel, how you should behave, and
how quickly you should heal, only make grief harder. Many of those
expectations come from a history of our misunderstanding about grief
as a taboo subject. Thanks to some pioneers in this area of research, we
now have a much be er understanding of the process of grief and how
to help ourselves through it. The expectations lead people to falsely
believe that they are going mad, ge ing it all wrong, weak and alone. In
reality, all the feelings, the ups and downs, are all a normal part of the
process. The lack of conversation about grief leads us to worry about
whether we are ge ing it right. The opposite to this, and a much more
helpful approach, is cultivating a compassionate connection with
yourself and others. One that allows you to express your feelings in a
safe place.

Expression
Expressing how you feel is not always easy. Some have the urge to talk.
Others clam up and can’t ﬁnd the words. If you want to talk, ﬁnd
someone whom you trust and start talking. If you have all of those very
normal fears of being a burden, upse ing the other person – say so. A
good friend will tell you what they can manage.
If you cannot talk, write. In whatever way the words come to you.
The act of ge ing those thoughts and feelings out on to the page can
help to unravel some of what is going on in your mind and body. It is
through the processing of those painful feelings that the work of
grieving is done.

Some people ﬁnd expression through painting, music, movement or
poetry. Whatever o ers a safe avenue for you to release and express
that raw emotion is worth making time and space for. If you are not
sure where to start, just start with anything that comes naturally to
you. Start with the thing that has helped in the past. Or start with
something just because you are curious about how it might be.
If you don’t have a therapist to hold the boundaries for you, this is
something you can do to ensure that you step into and back out of the
emotion. There is a time to feel and a time to block, a time for turning
towards and a time for turning away to rest your mind and body. So if
you are going to spend some time releasing and expressing that
emotion, have those safety nets that help you back.

Remember and keep living
When remembering someone causes pain, and engaging in the present
without them causes pain, the two experiences can feel at war with
each other. The demands of life keep coming and just one memory can
crop up and bring you to your knees.
Perhaps one of the things that changes over time with grief is the
bringing together of these two things. Or the discovery, through trying,
of a way the two needs can co-exist. The need to engage in life and the
need to remember and stay connected with the person lost. This could
be making time for moments that celebrate their life, spending time in
rituals that help you to continue your relationship with them, while also
making deliberate choices every day to live in a way that honours both
past and future.
The work of grief appears to be about stepping into your pain,
allowing it to wash over you, soothing and supporting yourself through
it, and stepping out of it again and into life as it is now, ﬁnding ways to
rest and nourish your body and mind through the exhaustion of grief
(Samuel, 2017).

Grow around the wound
The wound that is le following a loss is not something to be ﬁxed or
healed. We do not want to forget that person, we want to remember
them and continue to feel connected to them. So the wound does not
diminish or disappear. It remains while we work hard to build a life
around it (Rando, 1993). This is a concept that many people ﬁnd helpful
in therapy. The person is just as important to you as they ever were and
so the pain of losing them continues. But we ﬁnd a way to acknowledge
their life while beginning to grow and create a life with meaning and
purpose alongside that grief.
You ﬁnd ways to remember, celebrate and feel your connection to
that person, and to keep living. You learn that pain and joy, despair and
meaning can all be a part of life. You learn what you are capable of
surviving, the depths from which you can pull yourself up, and from
that, you keep going.

When to get professional help
Going to a counsellor or therapist does not mean you are ge ing the
grief thing wrong. We need support to get us through the pain of grief,
but not everybody has someone that they trust or want to talk openly
with. The therapy room can become a sanctuary. A safe space to
release raw emotion with someone who is trained to sit ﬁrm with you
through that. The therapist can help you to make sense of things, use
skills to help you manage safely, understand more about grief, and listen
in a way you have never been listened to before, without judgement,
advice or a empts to minimize and ﬁx things for you. A therapist
knows that the work of grief is through the pain, and their work is to
walk through it with you and o er a guide when you need it.

Chapter summary
Grief demands that we work through the pain.
It takes time to adjust to a life in which the loved one is
missing.
We need to ﬁnd a way to keep that connection going with the
loved one without their physical presence.
Acceptance of the new reality means we can continue to
engage with the things that ma er to us. Whatever you feel,
it’s ok to feel that.
Do not underestimate small steps and steady progress.

CHAPTER 17

The pillars of strength
The grief psychotherapist Julia Samuel set out the key structures that
support us to rebuild our lives through grief (2017). She calls them
‘pillars of strength’ because they take work and persistence to build. By
nurturing each of them, we gain a stable structure to help us through.
The pillars of strength are listed below.
1. Relationship with the person who has died
When we lose a loved one, our relationship and love for that person
does not end. Adapting to the loss involves ﬁnding new ways to feel
close to the loved one. For example, visiting a special place that you
shared or spending time at a grave or memorial.
2. Relationship with the self
Every other section in this book touches on self-awareness, and
working through grief demands the same. In understanding our own
coping mechanisms, ﬁnding ways to get support and look a er our
health and wellbeing throughout, we must listen to our own needs as
best we can along the way.
3. Expressing grief
There is no correct way to express grief. If you prefer to do that
through quiet reﬂection, memorials or sharing with friends, the act of
allowing yourself to feel whatever comes up and expressing that
helps the natural process. When emotions are especially

overwhelming, you can make use of the skills o ered in Section 3 to
help (see page 99).
4. Time
Pu ing an expectation on how much time you should need for grief
is se ing yourself up for struggle. When everything is overwhelming,
it helps to focus only on each day as it comes until you feel strong
enough to take a broader view of the future. Adding pressure to feel
a certain way in a particular time-frame only adds pain and distress.
5. Mind and body
As I covered in Section 1, our physical state, emotions, thoughts and
actions are like weaves in a basket (see page 53). We cannot change
one without inﬂuencing the other. This makes taking care of all of
those aspects of our experience even more important. Regular
exercise, eating well and ensuring we maintain some social contact
will all help us to strengthen our mental health when we most need
it.
6. Limits
When loved ones around us may be full of advice about how we
should be managing and when we should be ge ing back into
everyday life, remembering our capacity for holding boundaries
becomes an essential tool. If we are building self-awareness and
listening to our own needs, sometimes we need to put boundaries in
place and maintain them in order to do what is in our best interests.
7. Structure
I have spoken in previous chapters about our human need for balance
between predictability and adventure, structure and ﬂexibility. When
our mental health becomes vulnerable a er a loss, it makes sense to
o er a degree of ﬂexibility that allows for grieving, while also
maintaining some level of structure and routine that helps prevent
deterioration of your mental health from the absence of healthy
behaviours such as exercise and social contact.

8. Focusing
When there are not enough words to describe the sensations that we
feel, focusing our a ention on simply observing our internal world
and visualizing those sensations in the body can help to build
awareness of our own shi s in emotional and physical state.

Chapter summary
We can rebuild a life a er a bereavement with time, work and
persistence.
Create new ways you can feel close to your loved one with a
special place or memorial.
Listen to your needs as much as you can along the way.
There is no correct way to express grief.
Drop any expectations about how much time you should
spend grieving.

CHAPTER 18

Dealing with criticism and
disapproval
Criticism and disapproval is something we all have to face at some
point. But nobody ever really teaches us how to deal with it in a way
that allows that feedback to enhance our life instead of destroying our
self-esteem.
Even the anticipation of criticism or disapproval can be enough to
cause a paralysis in our ability to strive for things that ma er most to
us. So not having the skills to deal with criticism or disapproval in a
healthy way can cost you.
Now, this chapter is not about to tell you to just stop caring what
anyone else thinks of you. In fact, we are built to care about how we
are being perceived by those around us. Criticism can be a sign that we
haven’t lived up to expectation in some way and sometimes (but not
always) can signal a risk of rejection or abandonment. So receiving
criticism will naturally trigger your stress response. That response gears
us up, ready to do something about it. Historically, rejection from our
community was a serious threat to our survival. These days, things are
di erent in some ways, but similar in others. Rejection and loneliness
continue to be a big threat to our health and the brain continues doing
its job of trying to keep us safe in a group.
Beyond simply keeping us safe, our capacity to imagine what others
might think of us is a key skill that helps us to function in the social
groups that we live in. We develop our sense of self and identity, not
only from our own experience and how we interact with others, but

also through what we imagine those other people really think of us, the
ideas and perceptions they might have of us. This is called the ‘looking
glass self’ (Cooley, 1902). So it makes sense that what I believe you
think of me is going to inﬂuence what I do next.
So when we try to tell ourselves to just stop caring what anyone else
thinks, even if we feel a momentary boost, the impact of that is o en
short-lived at best.

People-pleasing
People-pleasing is more than just being nice to people. Anyone would
recommend being nice to people. But people-pleasing is a pa ern of
behaviour in which you consistently put all others before yourself even
to the detriment of your own health and wellbeing. It can leave us
feeling unable to express our needs, likes and dislikes, and unable to
hold boundaries or even keep ourselves safe. We say yes, when actually
we want and need to say no. We feel resentful of being taken
advantage of, but unable to change it by asking for anything di erent.
And the fear of disapproval never disappears because there is always
the possibility of pu ing a foot wrong, making a wrong choice and
displeasing someone – even if that person is someone we don’t like or
spend time with.
While it is in us all to care about the approval of our peers, peoplepleasing takes it much further. If we grow up in an environment in
which it is not safe to disagree or express di erence, if disapproval is
expressed with rage or contempt, then as children we learn how to
survive that environment. Keeping other people happy becomes a
survival skill that we hone and perfect throughout childhood. It is only
later, as adults, that those behaviour pa erns become detrimental to
our relationships. We second-guess every move we make, always
tentatively trying to work out what others are expecting of us. It may
even prevent us from making new connections as we hold back on

interactions when there is no guarantee that the other person likes us
back.
Living a life of people-pleasing is further complicated by the fact that
other people don’t always voice their disapproval with criticism. We can
fear and feel disapproval even when the other person never says a
word. When we don’t have that information, our mind starts to ﬁll in
the blanks for us. The spotlight e ect is a term originally coined by
Thomas Gilovich and Kenneth Savitsky (2000) to describe the
tendency of humans to overestimate how much others are focused on
us. We are each at the centre of our own spotlight of a ention and we
tend to imagine that others are focused on us too, when in reality,
everyone’s spotlights are usually on themselves. So we can o en make
the assumption that others are judging us negatively or disapproving
when they may not be thinking about us at all.
Those who feel socially anxious tend to focus their a ention more
on how they are being perceived by those around them (Clark & Wells,
1995). But those who feel more conﬁdent tend to have a more outward
focus of a ention, leading with a curiosity for other people.
So, if we have this brain that is set up to care a great deal what
everyone else is thinking, or maybe we notice a tendency towards
people-pleasing pa erns, how do we live alongside that? How do we
ensure that we can have those meaningful relationships but not
become trapped by constant worries about disapproval and
judgement? And how can we pick ourselves back up when disapproval
from someone else stops us from living in line with what ma ers to us?
The tasks of dealing with criticism:
Building up the ability to tolerate the criticism that could be
helpful and use it to your advantage while maintaining a sense of
self-worth.
Being open to learning from negative feedback that could help you
make progress.
Learning to let go of criticisms that reﬂect the values of someone
else rather than your own.

Ge ing clarity on which opinions ma er the most to you and why,
so that it becomes easier to know when to reﬂect and learn and
when to let go and move on.

Understanding people
Most people who are highly critical of others tend to be highly critical
of themselves also. It can reﬂect the way they have learned to speak to
themselves and everyone else. They criticize because it is what they
do, not necessarily because it is any reﬂection on your worthiness as a
human being, especially when it is a very personal a ack on your
character as opposed to anything that could be in any way helpful to
you on your path.
As humans we also have a tendency towards egocentric thinking,
which can play out in our insistence that other people live by the same
values and obey the same rules that we have set for ourselves. This
means that criticism can o en be based on the critical person’s view of
the world, neglecting the fact that we all have di erent life
experiences, values and personalities.
Understanding that people tend to criticize others based on their
own rules for living is helpful to remember, especially for anyone with
that tendency towards people-pleasing. We want everyone’s approval,
but if each person is unique with their own ideas and views, then we
simply cannot please everyone all of the time. If we have a close
relationship with the person, then we are likely to value their opinions
more (which can make the criticism more painful), but we also may
have the insight to be er understand what lies behind the disapproval.
Context is everything, but we don’t always have access to it. When
we don’t have that context, it is much harder to see the criticism for
what it is – one person’s idea that is wrapped up in their own
experiences. The natural instinct is to take on the criticism as a factual
statement that says something about who we are and to start
questioning our own self-worth.

Nurturing self-worth
Not all criticism is bad. When feedback focuses on a speciﬁc behaviour,
we tend to feel guilty, which prompts us to correct our mistakes to
repair the relationship. When criticism a acks our personality and our
sense of worth as a person, we tend to feel that in the form of shame.
Shame is the intensely painful feeling that can be mixed with other
emotions like anger or disgust. It is di erent from embarrassment,
which is less intense and tends to be felt in public. Shame is much more
painful. We feel unable to speak, think clearly or do anything. We want
to disappear and hide. The sheer intensity of the physical reaction
makes it di cult to recover from.
Shame triggers our threat system in such a way that it can feel like
someone held a match to all our other emotions. So we get a rush of
anger, fear or disgust to go along with it. Then the self-a ack comes
swarming in like soldiers over a hill, coming at you with self-criticism,
self-denigration and blame. With that sort of onslaught the instinct is to
block it all out. But shame is not easy to ignore. So we go for the most
absorbing, addictive behaviours that o er instant relief.
Shame resilience is something we can learn, but it is a life practice.
Building resilience to shame does not mean you never feel it. Instead, it
means we learn how to dust ourselves o and get back up.
Being able to experience shame and come back from it without
losing your sense of self-worth involves:
Ge ing to know what triggers shame for you. There are certain
aspects of our lives and things we do that we perceive to be a part
of who we are. That may be parenting or physical appearance or
creativity. Anything that you link to your self-worth can give rise
to shame. In order to build and maintain a sense of self-worth, we
need to understand that our worthiness as a human being is not
dependent on living mistake-free.
Reality-checking the criticism and all the judgements that follow.
Whether it comes from someone else or inside your own head,

judgements and opinions are not facts. They are narratives and
stories that can signiﬁcantly change our experience of the world.
So looking a er your self-worth involves taking the name-calling
and personal a acks out of the equation and focusing on the
speciﬁc concrete behaviours and their consequences. Reminding
yourself that being imperfect, making mistakes or failing is all a
part of being human. Making friends with your fallibility means
that when you do fail you don’t have to feel worthless. You can use
each experience to your advantage by learning from it.
Minding what you say. Criticism will always hurt a li le; that is our
brain doing its best to keep us safe. There is no antidote that
makes it all OK forever and ever, criticisms bouncing o your
armour. What use is armour anyway, when the worst critic is in
your own head? A harsh comment or criticism can leave you
feeling winded. Of course, naturally, you then spend the next ﬁve
hours rehearsing it again in your head. The brain wants to pay
a ention to it because it is a threat. But each time you go over it
in your mind, the stress response is triggered again. So one kick in
the stomach can feel more like a hundred kicks in the stomach.
Time spent thinking over a helpful criticism that we can put to
good use and that adds to the work we are doing in the world is
time well spent. Ruminating and churning over a nasty comment
with no sense of how this can help you is just a continuation of the
a ack on your character.
Talking to yourself in the right way a er a criticism. This is vital if
you want to have the capacity to move through shame and bounce
back. When we are in shame we may feel a sense of self-loathing,
and we convince ourselves that we need to continue the a ack.
The idea of responding to ourselves with respect and compassion
feels undeserved and indulgent, as if it would let you o the hook
and stop you bothering to try harder. But in reality, if you want a
man to get up o the ground, you have to stop beating him. The
key to using all criticism to your advantage is having your own
back, having so much self-compassion that you are able to listen to

criticism and decide which of that criticism you will take on board
and use to your advantage as a learning experience, and which
voices o er you nothing but dents in your self-esteem and crushed
conﬁdence.
Talking about shame itself. Reach out to someone you trust and
conﬁde in them. Secrets, silence and judgement intensify shame.
Sharing our experience with someone who responds with empathy
helps us to leave shame behind and move on.

Understanding you
Living the life you want to live in the face of criticism means ge ing
clear on:
The opinions that truly ma er to you and why. Whose opinions
ma er most to you? Saying ‘I don’t care what anyone thinks’ is
rarely true and hides a world of insecurities. It stops us creating
meaningful connections with others because it closes o any
avenue of communication in which both voices ma er. But the list
of whose opinions truly ma er needs to be small. It is also worth
pointing out that acknowledging who ma ers does not mean it is
your responsibility to please them. It just means you are willing to
listen to their feedback, even when it is not praise, because you
know it is likely to be honest and in your best interests, therefore
most likely to be helpful.
Why you do what you do. The one person you most need the
approval of is you. When the way we are living is out of line with
our values and what ma ers most, life stops feeling meaningful or
satisfying. Understanding the kind of person you want to be and
how you want to live your life, how you want to contribute to the
world, is the road you want to stay close to. When you know
exactly who you are and who you want to be, it is much easier to
choose which criticisms to take on board and which ones to let go.

Where those familiar critical voices are really coming from and
whether they are warranted and helpful or detrimental to our
wellbeing. When there is someone in your life who is predictably
critical, you hear their voice before they even say anything. Over
time we internalize their constant criticism so that it becomes the
way we speak to ourselves. So we may be highly self-critical
because we have learned to be. Recognizing that we learned that
way of speaking to ourselves helps us to acknowledge that we can
re-learn a new internal dialogue that serves us be er.

Chapter summary
Learning the skills to deal with criticism and disapproval in a
healthy way is a crucial life skill.
We are built to care what others think of us, so telling
ourselves that we don’t care is not the answer.
People-pleasing is more than just being nice to people. It is
the persistent placing of others’ wants or needs above your
own, even to the detriment of your own health and wellbeing.
Understanding why some people are highly critical helps.
Nurturing your own self-worth and resilience to shame is both
possible and potentially life-altering.

CHAPTER 19

The key to building conﬁdence
As a teenager growing up in a small town, I thought of myself as a
conﬁdent person. Then I le that small town and went o to university
over 100 miles away. But much of my conﬁdence, which I thought was
part of me, stayed at home. I was vulnerable, unsure of myself, not
clear on who I needed to be to ﬁt in. Over time, university life became
the new normal and I built up my conﬁdence, brick by brick, once again.
A er I graduated I got a job as a researcher for an addictions service.
Feeling conﬁdent to meet the demands of university was no longer
enough. I needed to tolerate that vulnerable feeling once again in order
to build up conﬁdence in this new arena. The same happened when I
began my clinical training, then a er qualiﬁcation, a er the birth of my
ﬁrst child, when I started my own practice and again when I started
making my work public on social media.
With every turn I have ever made, the conﬁdence that once seemed
enough suddenly seems inadequate and vulnerability returns.
Conﬁdence is like a home that you build for yourself. When you go
somewhere new, you must build a new one. But when we do, we’re not
starting from scratch. Every time we step into the unknown and try
something new, experience that vulnerability, make mistakes, get
through them and build some conﬁdence, we move on to the next
chapter with evidence that we can get through tough challenges. We
bring with us the courage we need to take that leap of faith again and
again. That same leap of faith the trapeze artist must take every time
she lets go of one bar before grabbing the next one. She is always

vulnerable, never completely safe, but each time she tries, she knows
she can meet that risk with the courage needed to make it happen.

To build conﬁdence, go where you have
none
Conﬁdent is not the same as comfortable. One of the biggest
misconceptions about becoming self-conﬁdent is that it means living
fearlessly. The key to building conﬁdence is quite the opposite. It
means we are willing to let fear be present as we do the things that
ma er to us.
When we establish some self-conﬁdence in something, it feels good.
We want to stay there and hold on to it. But if we only go where we
feel conﬁdent, then conﬁdence never expands beyond that. If we only
do the things we know we can do well, fear of the new and unknown
tends to grow. Building conﬁdence inevitably demands that we make
friends with vulnerability because it is the only way to be without
conﬁdence for a while.
But the only way conﬁdence can grow is when we are willing to be
without it. When we can step into fear and sit with the unknown, it is
the courage of doing so that builds conﬁdence from the ground up.
Courage comes ﬁrst, conﬁdence comes second. This doesn’t mean that
we have to dive in at the emotional deep end and risk overwhelming
ourselves.
But it does mean that we must recognize how fear helps us to
perform at our best and that we need to change our relationship with
that fear so that we no longer need to eliminate it before we try. We
learn to take fear with us.
Here is the Learning Model (Luckner & Nadler, 1991) that we can use
as a guide for building conﬁdence. Note down what aspects of your life
might be in the comfort zone, what tasks feel challenging but
manageable and which things you would put in the panic zone. Every

time you step into the stretch zone, you are doing the work of building
your conﬁdence by ﬂexing your courage.
When you are trying to build self-conﬁdence, it is a process of
building self-acceptance, self-compassion and learning the value in
vulnerability and fear. It is o en a balancing act that doesn’t always feel
easy. Along the way, all of the tools in this book can be used, as they
each help to build up your capacity to both lean into e ort and tolerate
the discomfort, then pull back and replenish.

Figure 8: The Learning Model (Luckner & Nadler, 1991).

Some of the main ingredients for that leap of faith we need for
stepping into the stretch zone are:
Recognition that you can improve with e ort.
Willingness to tolerate the discomfort of being vulnerable for a
while.

The commitment to yourself that you will always have your own
back and do the best by yourself whether you succeed or fail. This
means embracing self-compassion as a life practice and being your
own coach, not your worst critic.
Understanding how to move through the shame that can arise
from failure to prevent our tendency to quit on our dreams in an
e ort to avoid the shame of a setback. See Section 3 for more on
this.
To build conﬁdence, we don’t have to live in fear. We have to
develop a daily pa ern of stepping into fear, si ing with it, and
stepping back out, giving ourselves time to recover and replenish
ready for tomorrow. See Section 6 on fear.

Why you don’t need to work on your selfesteem
There is a whole industry built on the concept of self-esteem and the
idea that if we can just believe in ourselves, we will perform be er and
improve our relationships and our overall happiness in life.
Self-esteem generally means being able to evaluate yourself
positively and believe in those appraisals (Harris, 2010). So anyone
trying to help you increase your self-esteem might ask you to list what
you like about yourself and what your strengths are, and try to
convince you to believe that you can become a ‘success’ in the world.
But we have a problem with the concept of ‘success’. We link it to the
idea of wealth, winning, standing out and being acknowledged by
others. So how do you know if you’re winning? You compare yourself to
others. Maybe you go online and pick any of the 4.6 billion internet
users from across the world. With a pool that size, you are guaranteed
to ﬁnd someone who is doing be er than you at something. When you
do, self-esteem might take a hit because if you are not the winner, you
can start to see yourself as a loser instead.

What if you stay o ine and only compare yourself to your friends
and family instead? Doing that is not going to nurture healthy
relationships. Associating a measure of ‘success’ to worthiness would
inevitably make it di cult to truly connect with the people you are
comparing yourself to. What happens when you lose your job and your
friend gets a promotion? A review of the research by a group of
psychologists showed that high self-esteem is not linked with be er
relationships or be er performance. But it does correlate with
arrogance, prejudice and discrimination (Baumeister et al., 2003). They
found no signiﬁcant evidence that trying to boost self-esteem through
intervention had any beneﬁts.
Self-esteem cannot be relied on when it is contingent on being a
‘success’. It is psychological rent that you can never stop paying. The
second you notice signs that you might be less than, you brand yourself
as not enough. So you keep running on a hamster wheel of success,
driven by a scarcity mindset and the fear of being inadequate.

Ditch the positive afﬁrmations
You cannot open a social media platform without coming across an
o ering of daily a rmations. The idea behind this is that if you say
something to yourself enough times you will start to believe it and
become it. But as it turns out, things aren’t quite that simple. For those
who already have high self-esteem and believe in themselves, repeating
a rmations can have a small beneﬁt of feeling a li le be er. But some
studies have shown that for people with low self-esteem, repeating
a rmations and statements that they don’t believe, for example, ‘I am
strong, I am lovable,’ or being asked to focus on all the reasons that
statement is true, tended to make them feel worse (Wood et al., 2009).
The reason for this may be that internal dialogue we all have. If you
say out loud that you are strong and lovable, but you don’t believe that
you are, then your inner critic will get to work coming up with all the
reasons why you are not strong or lovable. The result is an internal

ba le, and plenty of time to focus on all the narratives that bring you
down while you are desperately trying to push them away.
So what works instead? Well, the study I previously mentioned found
that when those with low self-esteem were told it is OK to experience
negative thoughts, their mood improved. They no longer had to ba le
with trying to convince themselves of something they didn’t yet
believe. Therefore, on the days when we don’t feel strong, we don’t
need to tell ourselves that we are. We can acknowledge that feeling
this way sometimes is a part of being human. We can respond to it with
compassion and encouragement. We can then turn to the things that
help us to feel conﬁdent in our own strength again, by using all the
tools at our disposal to move through tough times in line with the
person we want to be. The way that we start to believe something
more positive about ourselves is to use action to create evidence for it.
While a rmations may not be the best strategy for those with low
self-esteem, words still ma er. If mistakes and failure lead to an
onslaught of self-a ack, do not let any of it go unchecked. Professional
athletes have professional coaches for a reason. In day-to-day life we
don’t have that, so we must be that voice for ourselves. The natural
emotional response to failure inﬂuences our thoughts and makes us
more vulnerable to self-criticism. So we can’t always stop it, but we can
respond to it with an alternative that serves us be er. To build
conﬁdence, you have to get to work being your own coach instead of
your own worst critic. That includes responding to failure in a way that
will help you to get up, dust yourself o and get back out there. A
professional coach would not bully you with words, or chant
a rmations that you couldn’t believe in. They bring honesty,
accountability, unconditional encouragement and support. They are in
your corner, whatever the score, with your best interests at heart.
Doing that for yourself is not always easy, but is a life skill that we can
improve on with practice.

Toolkit: Changing your relationship with fear to build
conﬁdence

To begin building conﬁdence in something that makes you feel nervous,
you can practise welcoming the sensations of fear and si ing with
them, without pushing them away. To do this, we don’t have to put
ourselves in a situation that causes intense panic or terror. In fact, that
is not advisable. Instead, we can practise by dipping a toe in the water.
Stepping slightly out of that comfort zone just enough that you can feel
the stress response without feeling overwhelmed.
Write down the situation in which you would like to build more
conﬁdence. Put the most vulnerable situation at the top. Then list
any variations of that situation that may feel more manageable but
still challenging. For example, if I want to build my conﬁdence in
social situations, I may put parties at the top of the list as the
occasion in which I feel least conﬁdent. Slightly easier than that
might be a party at which I know everyone. Easier than that might
be a small gathering of close friends. Easier still might be going to a
café with a trusted friend. Once you have your list, you don’t start
at the top. You take the scenario that presents a challenge but still
feels possible. You then repeat that behaviour as o en as you can.
Once your conﬁdence grows and that situation becomes a comfort
zone, you move up to the next thing on the list.
‘The perfect nurturer’ is a tool originally developed by Paul Gilbert and
Deborah Lee and used in Compassion Focused Therapy (CFT). It can be
a helpful way to turn your focus towards the self-talk you need when
building your conﬁdence.
A perfect nurturer is an image of a person that you can return to in
order to feel safe and nurtured when that is what you need. If you
prefer the idea of a coach, you can use that instead.
Create an image in your mind of the perfect nurturer or
coach (this could be a real or imagined person).

Imagine you are sharing with them what you are currently
facing, how you feel about it and what you want to work on.
Take some time to imagine in detail how that perfect
nurturer or coach might respond, and write it down. This sets
the tone for the words you can start using to respond to
yourself as you work on building your own conﬁdence and
inevitably face vulnerability along the way.

Chapter summary
Conﬁdence cannot grow if we are never willing to be without
it.
To build conﬁdence, go where you have none. Repeat every
day and watch your conﬁdence develop.
Conﬁdence is situation-speciﬁc, but what you keep as you
move around is the belief that you can tolerate the fear as
conﬁdence grows.
You do not need to overwhelm yourself with your worst-case
scenario. Start with small changes.
Along the way, be your own coach, not your worst critic.
Courage comes before conﬁdence.

CHAPTER 20

You are not your mistakes
Most self-doubt is linked to the relationship we have with failure. I am
not about to sit here and tell you to just be OK with failure, then
everything will be easy. That is not true. Failure is never easy. It stings
every time. We all want to be enough. We all want to be acceptable
and failure is a sign that maybe we weren’t enough this time.
It is not only our relationship with our own failure that needs to
change, but also how we respond to the failure of others. You don’t
have to spend too long on Twi er to develop an overwhelming fear of
failure. Say the wrong thing in a tweet and a collective army of
tweeters invade and hound you with verbal abuse, demanding you be
pulled down from whatever heights you may have climbed in your
lifetime. I have seen this happen to people who make simple mistakes
in their use of language and immediately apologize for it. Given that
social media is a magniﬁed reﬂection of who we are as a society, this
speaks to me about the intense shame we associate with any form of
failure. Those who are highly self-critical are more likely to be critical of
others. If we believe that mistakes and shortcomings should be met
with humiliation and shame no ma er what the intention, how do we
ever begin to be OK with taking risks and making mistakes ourselves?
Something that has helped me a lot is understanding that how other
people respond to my failures does not provide an accurate assessment
of my personality and worthiness as a human, but instead indicates
how that person relates to failure. Accepting failure is hard in
environments where people a ack each other for mistakes. No ma er
how hostile we are towards failure collectively, changing our

relationship with failure must begin with us. Failure hurts every time,
whether the environment is safe or not. Therefore, we avoid it at all
costs. We quit when things get hard, we switch to an easier, safer
option, or we refuse to begin at all. All of those choices are addictive
because they bring that blissful sense of relief. Phew! I don’t have to
face that today. We do that enough times and it becomes a pa ern in
our lives that keeps us stuck in a comfort zone that feels like treacle,
with all its lethargy and lack of energy for anything.
If the opposite of resisting failure is accepting it as a part of growth
and learning, how do we do that? It is one thing to communicate
something intellectually, it is quite another to feel it and truly believe it
in the moment. Saying it is only useful if you can buy into it. Belief is
everything. So we need to say something that we can buy into.
Therefore, it is no use trying to convince ourselves that it is safe to fail.
We cannot guarantee how others will react. There will always be critics.
Not everyone is going to help you up when you fall. Our only option is
to commit wholeheartedly to doing that for ourselves. Start by
recognizing that coming back from failure cannot be dependent on
others. Using support that is available is always a good idea, but we
cannot always count on someone else being there, so commi ing to
ourselves that we will take responsibility to tend to our wounds with
compassion and dust ourselves o a er a fall is essential if our
resilience is not to be dependent on others doing that for us.

Bouncing back from failure
1. Recognize the sensations in your body and signs in your urges and
actions that indicate to you how you are feeling. If you ﬁnd
yourself using all of your favourite numbing activities – hours of
TV, alcohol or social media. The sting of failure drives us to block.
So even if you don’t initially notice the feeling, you can notice the
blocking behaviour.

2. Get unstuck. Remember the story about Jim Carrey removing the
mask? It had less power over him when it was not right in front of
his face. We can do this with emotion by seeing it as an experience
washing over us, not as who we are. If you can label the emotion,
it enables your mind to take a step back from it. If you can label
the pa ern of your thoughts, that will do the same thing. The
account of what is going on, as told by your mind, is not a fact, but
a theory, opinion, story or idea. That opinion is tinted with critical
voices from your past and present, memories of feeling vulnerable
or having failed. As we get to know the pa erns of those critical
voices and where they may have come from, we can even give
that stream of thought a name. There is Helga, giving her two
cents! Doing this can be powerful at helping us to get some
distance from the self-a ack and giving us more choice over
whether we buy into it as factual or see it as just one (very
unhelpful) option.
3. Notice the urges to block the painful feelings and keep reminding
yourself that you do not have to act on those urges. When we stop
ﬁghting emotion, but instead allow it to wash over us in all its
might, it is painful and it is messy. But it also washes past. If we try
to push it down and hold it under, it stays there, waiting for its
chance to be processed. The opposite of blocking emotion is to be
curious about it. Move towards it. Observe and notice the whole
experience, all while doing Step 4.
4. Soothe your way through and have your own back with the
commitment of the best friend you could ever wish for. Be honest
with yourself while also o ering unconditional love and support.
‘Wow, that was tough. Hold on.’ The best kind of friends know
they cannot ﬁx things for us. But they stand strong by our side
through the whole thing.
5. Get learning. Anyone coaching a professional athlete will analyse
each performance. They don’t only look for what went wrong.
They also look at what is working. So when the pain of the setback
has been calmed, get to work on making that experience useful for

you. Don’t neglect to notice the things you did well. Appreciate
what worked and what didn’t. Be your own coach so that you can
learn from the experience and move forward.
6. Return to what ma ers. Failure and setbacks hurt every time but
dusting o and ge ing back out there may still be in line with our
values. When the pain of failure is still present it can be di cult to
even consider trying again. Instead we want to run and hide.
Coming back to your values and the reason you are doing this
thing will help you make a decision based on your best interests
and the life you want to have, rather than basing that decision
purely on the pain. That being said, I don’t want to trivialize just
how much we can be overwhelmed with emotion a er failure, so
take your time. It is important to work through the experience
ﬁrst, and try again when you are ready.
Check out the chapter on values for more details (see page
284), but in the heat of the moment we don’t always have time to
whip out our worksheets and double-check what is in line with our
values. In that moment, simply ask yourself, ‘When I look back on
this time, what choices would I be proud of? What actions could I
take that I will be grateful I took a year from now? How can I learn
from this and keep moving forward?’

Chapter summary
Most self-doubt is linked to the relationship we have with
failure.
How other people respond to your failure does not say
anything about your own personality or worthiness.
The sting of failure can drive us to numb or block emotion. So
even if you don’t initially notice the feeling, you can notice
the blocking behaviours.
Be your own coach and turn failure into a learning experience
as you keep moving forwards in line with what ma ers most
to you.
The emotional response to failure can be overwhelming, so
take your time.

CHAPTER 21

Being enough
The brick wall that most people hit on their way to self-acceptance is
the misconception that it will cause laziness and complacency. They
think that self-acceptance means believing you are OK just as you are,
therefore you will have no motivation for improvement, work,
achievement or change. In reality, the research shows us that those
who develop self-acceptance and learn to be self-compassionate are
less likely to fear failure, more likely to persevere and try again when
they do fail and generally have more self-conﬁdence (Ne et al., 2005).
Self-acceptance and the compassion we show ourselves when we are
accepting of the self is not the same as becoming indi erent to the
world and passively resigning yourself to accept defeat when things are
tough. Having unconditional love for yourself means doing the opposite
sometimes. It can mean taking the more di cult road because it is in
your best interests. It is refusing to kick yourself while you are down or
indulging in self-loathing, and instead using every ounce of strength to
pull yourself back up a er a fall.
The di erence is that when you strive, you do so from a place of love
and contentment rather than striving from a place of fear and scarcity.
If we don’t do the work to develop self-acceptance, we set ourselves
up to live a life in which we may need constant reassurance, get
trapped in jobs we hate or relationships that cause us harm, or ﬁnd
ourselves living with resentment.
So how do we start developing self-acceptance?

Understanding yourself
Sounds simple, but many people go through life without much in the
way of examining their own pa erns of behaviour that impact on their
experience of life. To build self-acceptance we ﬁrst need to understand
who we are and who we want to be. That comes from practising selfawareness. We become self-aware through self-reﬂection. Keeping
journals, going to a therapist or talking to friends can all help us to
reﬂect on ourselves and our experience in a way that enables us to
learn more about who we are and why we do what we do. Selfacceptance involves listening to our own needs and meeting them. If
we are not paying a ention, we don’t always pick up on the signs.
During that process it is important to be a entive to the parts of us
that we feel proud of and the parts of us that we may prefer not to
think about – the things we dislike, feel anxious or regretful about, or
want to change. But when we do reﬂect on those more di cult aspects
of the self, it is crucial that we come at it with the compassion of an
observer if we are to learn. If reﬂecting on di cult situations triggers
intense emotions that make it harder to think clearly, it can be helpful
to get support from a therapist to help us work through it.

Painting the picture of self-acceptance
Let’s say that from the moment you closed this book you started living
your life with unconditional self-acceptance. What would that look like?
What would you do di erently? What would you say yes to? What
would you say no to? What would you work harder on? What would
you let go of? How would you speak to yourself? How would you speak
to others?
Try writing down your answers to those questions in great detail and
create a vision of how the idea of self-acceptance would translate into
behaviour change for you. As with most changes, the action comes ﬁrst
and the feeling comes later. So living a life in which you feel a sense of

self-worth means making it a life practice. The work is never done. You
never arrive. You do the work every day to live in line with
unconditional self-acceptance.

Accepting all of you
While you maintain a sense of self that stays with you throughout your
life, you also experience a wide range of emotional states that are
constantly in motion, changing from one moment to the next. We take
on di erent roles and behaviours in di erent scenarios and many
people see those as di erent parts of themselves. Depending on our
early life experiences and how the world responded to those emotion
states, we can feel that some parts of the self are less acceptable than
others. If anger was unacceptable for you growing up, then it might feel
much harder to treat yourself with compassion and acceptance when
you are feeling angry. This makes self-acceptance conditional on how
you feel.
Try this: You can build your awareness of how you respond to

various emotions and practise stepping back from them and
responding to them with compassion using the following
exercise that is used in Compassion Focused Therapy (CFT)
(Irons & Beaumont, 2017).
Spend a few moments thinking back to a recent event that triggered
a mix of emotions. It is a good idea to start with something that is not
too distressing so that you don’t become overwhelmed while trying to
practise the exercise.
1. Write down a few thoughts about the event.
2. Write down the di erent emotions it brought up, for example
anger, sadness, anxiety.
3. For each emotion that you identiﬁed, take one at a time, connect
with that feeling and explore your answers to the following

questions.
1. Where do you notice that feeling in your body? How did you
know that feeling was there?
2. Which of your thoughts were linked to that feeling? If that
emotion could speak, what would it say?
3. What urges came along with that feeling? If that emotion had
been able to decide the outcome, what would it have made
you do? (For example, anxiety may have wanted you to run
away, anger may have wanted you to shout at someone).
4. What does that part of you need? What would help that
emotion to come back down to calm?
Once you have done this for each emotion that was present, end by
answering the questions for your compassionate self. The part of you
that wants to show yourself unconditional love and acceptance.
As you do this for each emotion, give yourself time to step back from
connecting with an emotion before stepping into the next one (if there
were lots of mixed emotions). Each time you do this, you are
strengthening the ability to defuse those emotions and get a good
understanding of them without ge ing overwhelmed by them.
This can be a helpful exercise for examining those mixed emotions,
allowing us to see that even those emotions that we once saw as
unacceptable are just normal. Each reﬂects a di erent way of
interpreting the situation, so we can come to di erent conclusions
about which direction to take next. Taking time to get a birds-eye-view
of emotional experiences like this can help us to engage with our
compassion even in situations where we have been taught to be harsh
on ourselves.

Kicking self-criticism
What does your self-criticism sound like? What words do you use?
What does it focus on?

What types of things do you criticize yourself for? Appearance,
performance, personality traits, comparison?
Certain forms of self-criticism can be more damaging than others.
Sometimes self-criticism can take the form of telling yourself that
you are inadequate a er a failure.
But when it goes further than that and you feel a sense of disgust
and hate towards yourself, it is even more pervasive and shaming.
Try this: This is a quick exercise that can help us get some
distance from our inner critic and see it for what it is.
Once you have reﬂected on all the di erent ways you criticize
yourself, take a moment to imagine that critic as a person outside your
own head. What would they look like? What would their facial
expression and tone of voice be as they spoke to you? What emotions
would they be expressing? How does it feel to have them in front of
you? What do you think might be their intention? Is this a misguided
a empt to protect you in some way? Is this someone you would want
to spend time with? Is this someone who could help you to live a happy
life? And ﬁnally ask yourself, what is the impact of spending every hour
of every day with that critic?

Finding your compassionate side
When your inner critic has been a close (but unwanted) companion for
most of your life, it is almost impossible to simply decide to remove
them. That well-practised action means those neural pathways are
easily accessible for your brain. So that voice will speak up from time to
time. What we need to do is provide ourselves with a new, healthier
and more helpful voice, and then start practising. In the same way that
you made time to see and hear the inner critic, let’s invite the
compassionate side of you to the party. The side that wants the best
for you and recognizes the harm that the self-a ack causes. That part

of you still wants you to grow and achieve, but from a place of love
rather than shame.
Take some time to consider what compassionate self-talk might
sound like. Remember, this is not the same as positive thinking.
Someone who has compassion is honest and kind, encouraging and
supportive, and wants the best for you. What words would you use
when showing compassion to others? What words of compassion have
others expressed to you? Bring to mind a memory of a time when
someone showed you compassion. How did they look at you? What did
they say? How did that make you feel? What would it be like to have
access to that voice at any time?
Try this: To strengthen our compassionate side, we simply have
to put in some reps on a regular basis and practise. Try writing a
compassionate le er to yourself. Allow yourself to write
spontaneously in the way you might write to a close friend who
was su ering or trying their best to change. How would you
express to them that you had their back always and wished for
their su ering to ease? Nobody needs to read the le er. But the
process of engaging with your compassionate self and thinking
through the various ways you can express that helps you to
build that mental muscle to use it when you most need it.
If you ﬁnd yourself struggling to access that feeling of compassion
for yourself, focus on someone that you love unconditionally and
imagine you are writing to them, or use the words that loved ones have
said to you in the past.

Chapter summary
There is a misconception that self-acceptance will cause
laziness, complacency and lack of drive.
In reality the research shows us that those who develop selfacceptance and learn to be self-compassionate are less likely
to fear failure and more likely to try again when they do fail.
Self-acceptance is not the same as passively accepting defeat.
Self-compassion o en involves taking the more di cult road
that is in your best interests.

CHAPTER 22

Make anxiety disappear!
For as long as I can remember, I have had a fear of heights. For the
most part I was able to avoid them, growing up. But when I met my
now husband, we went on a trip to Italy together. We went to visit the
Leaning Tower of Pisa and as we stood looking at it, he held out two
tickets. We were going to the top. A deep intake of breath was
followed by another glance up at the tower that leans at 3.99 degrees
and looks worryingly close to falling over.
My heart started to beat against my ribcage and I felt sick. But the
tickets were bought, so up we went. To get to the top of the Leaning
Tower of Pisa, you climb the narrow stone steps that spiral around
inside the tower. The ground beneath your feet is not level and as you
scale the tower you get the sensation that it is starting to fall over. At
least that was my assessment at the time. With a queue of people
behind me I kept going. Once at the top the tilt feels even worse.
Everyone walked straight over to the edge to take in the view. I had the
overwhelming urge to get closer to the ground. I moved as far away
from the edge as I could get and dropped to the ground. There was a
vague a empt to make it look like I was just si ing down casually to
have a rest, but by now my fear of embarrassment was outweighed by
my fear of falling to my death. Of course, si ing on the ﬂoor made me
no safer. But it was not based on logic. My brain was sending out strong
signals to the rest of my body to get down. I even found myself looking
down at the slab of stone to avoid looking out at the view. Ma hew
took a picture of me crouching on the ﬂoor and we now have a funny

memory to look back on. But what was going on at the time? Why did I
have the urge to get on the ﬂoor?
My phobia, learned early in childhood, meant that the moment I saw
those tickets and imagined climbing to the top of the tower, my body
reacted. My heart started beating faster, my breathing became shallow
and fast, my palms sweaty. The building being o balance only
contributed to my predictions that I would fall to my death at any
moment. But the brain’s alarm system, which was sounding and telling
me to get to safety, is more like a smoke alarm. It doesn’t have time to
take account of all the facts. Its job is to sense danger and let me know.
It takes its information from the distress signals in my body, information
about my surroundings from my senses, and pieces that together with
memories of what was happening when I last felt this way. In the same
way that a smoke alarm can go o when there is a ﬁre, it can also go o
when someone is making the toast. The strong urge to drop to the
ground was a suggestion from my brain that my body took very
seriously (much to the amusement of everyone else on the tower). The
fear was overwhelming, so I did the ﬁrst thing I could think of to feel
safer. I wanted the fear to go away.
Those strong urges to get to safety are not a fault, but the brain
working at its best to keep us safe. Crucially, my actions did not make
me any safer but just helped me to feel safer.
The question of how to make anxiety go away might be one of the
most common questions I receive. It makes sense to ask that. Anxiety is
uncomfortable at best, overwhelming at worst. When you feel anxious,
your body is working really hard so it’s also exhausting. Nobody wants
to live with anxiety every day.
Here is where I went wrong on the Leaning Tower of Pisa and did
very li le to help my fear of heights. I avoided the fear as much as I
could. I got close to the ground, I avoided looking out at the view. I
even shut my eyes when I could. I tried to convince myself that I was
not up high. I le the tower before my fear had le me. As my feet hit
the comforting grass of the Field of Dreams once again, I felt a rush of
relief and my body immediately calmed. My brain said, ‘Phew! That was

dangerous. Let’s never do that again!’ I did everything I could to make
the fear go away as soon as possible. But all the things that give us that
instant relief tend to keep us stuck in the long term.
If I knew then what I know now, and I was on that trip to tackle my
fear of heights, here’s what I would have done. I would have gone to
the top of the tower and looked out at the view. The feelings would all
have been the same, but this time I would allow it to be present
without trying to avoid it. I would have responded to them by taking
control of my breathing and I would have focused on breathing slowly. I
would have reminded myself that my body and brain were responding
in this way because I have memories of being up high and feeling
unsafe as a child. I would have reminded myself repeatedly that I was,
in fact, safe. I would turn my a ention to why I was there and I would
continue to breathe slowly for however long it took for my body to
exhaust itself. When my fear started to subside and my body calmed,
only then would I step down again. I would then repeat that pa ern for
as many days as possible, knowing that over time my body would
habituate to the situation and my fear response would gradually reduce
in its intensity.
Fear is a part of our survival response. It is supposed to be intensely
uncomfortable, and the urges to escape and then avoid the feared
situation are supposed to be strong. If we are in a survival situation,
that system works incredibly well to keep us safe. That moment you are
crossing the road and you hear a car horn too close, before you can
even think about the situation, you dash to the curb quicker than you
ever thought you could move. Then you feel the surge of adrenaline
wash over your entire body. That is your fear response working at its
best. But a system that works that fast does not have time to
contemplate what signs are valid and which ones might be less reliable
signs of danger. It senses, it acts. You survive. ‘Thank you, brain.’
In other situations when your life is not in danger, the urges are still
the same. You’re asked to speak in a meeting and your heart starts
pounding. Your heart may be ge ing your body ready to be alert and
perform. But if you interpret that as fear and make your excuses to

leave the room, then avoid those meetings in the future, you never get
to experience talking in meetings and having it go well.
The things that give us immediate relief from our fear tend to feed
that fear in the long term. Every time we say no to something because
of fear, we reconﬁrm our belief that it wasn’t safe or that we couldn’t
handle it. Every time we cut something out of our lives because of fear,
life shrinks a li le. So our e orts to get rid of fear today mean that fear
gets to take over our life choices in the long term.
Our a empts to control fear and eliminate it become the real
problem that dictates our every move. Fear is around every turn, in
every novel situation we face, in every creative endeavour and every
learning experience. If we are unwilling to experience it, what are we
le with?

Chapter summary
It is understandable to want anxiety to disappear. It is
supposed to be uncomfortable.
To ﬁght fear you must ﬁrst be willing to face it.
Escape and avoidance only provides short-term relief but
feeds anxiety in the long term.
Our a empts to control fear and eliminate it become the real
problem that dictates our every move.
A threat response needs to work fast, so it tends to sound the
alarm before you have a chance to think things through in
more detail.

CHAPTER 23

Things we do that make
anxiety worse
When we feel anxious about something, the most natural human
response is to avoid it. We know that if we stay away, we’ll feel safe, for
now. But avoidance not only maintains anxiety, it makes it worse over
time.
Your brain learns like a scientist. Each time it has an experience,
positive or negative, it clocks that as evidence for its beliefs. If you
avoid the thing you fear, you never give yourself the chance to build up
evidence in your mind that you can get through it and survive. Just
telling your brain that something is safe is not enough. You must
experience it.
Your brain will take some convincing, so you need to repeat that
behaviour over and over. As many times as it takes. The things you do
most of the time become your comfort zone. So, if you want to feel
less anxious about something, do it as o en as you can. Use the skills to
help you sit with the anxiety and it will reduce over time.
When we learn to face the things that make us feel afraid, we get
stronger. When we do that day a er day, over time we develop a sense
of growth. Imagine if, over the next ﬁve years, you made your decisions
based on the life you want to have, instead of fear.
We avoid the discomfort of fear in so many ways. If you feel anxious
about a social event, you may avoid it by not going. Or maybe you do
go, but you drink to excess before you go. Drinking may dampen that
anxiety in the moment, leaving you feeling the need to do the same at

the next social event. These safety behaviours work in the same way to
numb the anxiety in the moment. But they don’t help us to feel less
afraid in the future. In fact, they do the opposite. They feed the anxiety
for the future and we become dependent on using those safety
behaviours, making life even harder.
Here is a list of some common safety behaviours that ease anxiety in
the moment, but keep us stuck in the long term:
Escape – Whether it be in a social situation, the supermarket or a
conﬁned space, when anxiety hits we have the urge to get out of there
as quickly as possible.
Anxious avoidance – The moment you say no to that invitation to
avoid the social situation or opt for food deliveries to avoid the anxious
feeling you get in the supermarket, you are rewarded with instant relief.
‘Phew. I don’t have to face that feeling today.’ But the longer you stay
away from something, the more the fear seems to grow. Then the day
comes that you need to face it once again and it now feels
overwhelming.
Compensatory strategies – This can happen a er experiencing a high
anxiety state. For example, someone with a fear of contamination or
sickness may wash excessively a er being in a hospital se ing.
Anticipation – Also called sensitization, this is when we rehearse and
anticipate various worst-case scenarios that may occur in a feared
situation. We are o en convinced that it is helping because it will
protect us if we are prepared, but it can lead to hyper-vigilance and
excessive worry without constructive planning, which leads to
increased anxiety.
Reassurance seeking – In moments of anxiety and doubt we may ask
for reassurance from a loved one that everything will be OK. It is hard
to see a loved one in distress, so they are o en more than willing to use
reassurance to help calm the anxiety. But over time that instant relief

can become addictive and we develop a dependency on that other
person. We may need almost constant reassurance, or feel unable to
leave the house without being accompanied by the person who makes
us feel safe, which can weigh heavily on a relationship.
Safety behaviours – We can also come to rely on things that we
associate with safety if we don’t trust ourselves to be able to cope
when anxiety hits. We may feel unable to go anywhere without ‘just in
case’ medications, or we take a mobile phone everywhere because
looking down at it enables us to avoid conversation at social events.

Chapter summary
When we feel anxious about something, the most natural
human response is to avoid it.
But avoidance maintains anxiety.
Just telling your brain that something is safe is not enough.
You must experience it to truly believe it.
Your brain will take some convincing, so you need to repeat
that behaviour over and over.
The things you do most o en become your comfort zone.
If you want to feel less anxious about something, do it as
o en as you can.

CHAPTER 24

How to calm anxiety right now
If you struggle with anxiety you are probably hoping for a tip that you
can use right now. Something easy to learn that will have instant
e ects. Many people feel this way at the beginning of therapy. That is
why I always teach people this ﬁrst skill as early as possible. It is easy to
learn and takes just a few minutes to bring down the intensity of
anxiety. At the very least, it prevents anxiety from escalating into
panic.
When anxiety is triggered, you start breathing more quickly. This is
your body’s way of ge ing in extra oxygen to fuel the survival
response.
You feel as though you cannot catch your breath. So you breathe
faster with rapid, shallow breaths, then you have an excess of oxygen in
your system. If you slow your breathing down, you can calm the body
and, in turn, slow your breathing. Not only this, but if you can extend
the outbreath so that it is longer or more vigorous than the inbreath,
this helps to slow your heart rate down. When the pounding heart
comes down, so does the anxiety response.
Some people like to count the breaths when doing an extended
outbreath, such as breathing in for a count of 7 and out for a count of
11, or a variation that works for you.
Taking some time to practise slow breathing techniques is a great
investment of time. It’s an anxiety management tool that works in the
moment. You can do it anywhere, any time and nobody even needs to
know you are doing it. One of my favourites is square breathing. Just
follow the steps below.

Toolkit: Square breathing

Step 1. Focus your gaze on something square: a nearby window, door,
picture frame or computer screen.
Step 2. Focus your eyes on the bo om le -hand corner and as you
breathe in, count to 4 and trace your eyes up to the top corner.
Step 3. Hold your breath for 4 seconds as you trace your eyes across
the top to the other corner.
Step 4. As you breathe out, trace your eyes down to the bo om corner,
counting to 4 once again.
Step 5. Hold for 4 seconds as you move back to the bo om le corner
to start again.
So, you breathe in for 4 seconds, hold for 4 seconds, out for 4 seconds
and hold for 4 seconds. Focusing on something square can act as a
guide and help you to keep your a ention on the breathing, minimizing
the chances of being distracted too soon. If you try it for a few minutes
and feel like it’s not working yet, keep going. It takes some time for
your body to respond.
One extra tip is to practise this every day, at times when you don’t
feel anxious. When something is well practised, it is much easier to use
when you ﬁnd yourself overwhelmed with fear.

Movement
Another tool that has almost instant e ects, and requires very li le
practice to master, is exercise. When your anxiety response is triggered,
your muscles ﬁll up with oxygen and adrenaline, ready to move fast. If
you don’t move and burn o that fuel, your body is like a rocket with

engines ﬁring and nowhere to go. Bring on the trembling, shaking,
sweating and the urge to pace around the house.
Exercise is one of the best anxiety management tools because it
follows the natural course of your threat response. Your body is geared
up to move. Allow it to do that and your body can use up the energy
and stress hormones it has produced and rebalance.
If you have a stressful day, try adding in a short jog outside, or an
intense half hour with a punch bag. Physical movement will truly relieve
your body of the physical stress so that when you sit down to relax,
you can feel calm and fall asleep more easily, helping you to replenish
further.
My extra tip here is that exercise is also a powerful prevention tool,
so try to exercise even on the days when you don’t feel anxious. This
way you are se ing yourself up to have a be er day tomorrow. Your
mental health will thank you for it.

Chapter summary
When anxious our breathing becomes faster and each breath
is more shallow.
To calm the body take slower, deeper breaths.
Try to make the outbreath longer and more vigorous than the
inbreath.
Give it some time and the anxiety response will begin to drop.

CHAPTER 25

What to do with anxious
thoughts
Like many other kids in the early 90s, I was allowed to stay up a li le
later on a Friday evening to watch Casualty, a television show about an
Accident and Emergency department. This particular episode (the only
episode I remember to this day) was about a man who lived on the
sixth ﬂoor of a block of ﬂats. A ﬁre breaks out downstairs and he is
trapped. Not long later I am lying in bed, running through it in my mind.

What would I do if my house caught on ﬁre? Is the house on ﬁre now?
How would I know? What if I wouldn’t wake up in time? Maybe I should
try and stay awake. Maybe I should open the bedroom door and check
downstairs. I lie there, eyes wide open, trying out di erent scenarios in

my head. Imagining waking up my younger sister, who was in the room
with me, opening the door to a cloud of smoke, opening the windows
and calling for help. Soon the warm glow through the glass panel above
my bedroom door started to look more and more like the orange glow
of ﬁre. I remained still and silent, unable to move, listening for the
crackling sounds and waiting for the smoke.
That night, I not only believed that a ﬁre in my home was possible, I
saw it happening over and over in my own head. I bought into every
scenario as if it were occurring. Played it over and over in my head like
a movie.
When a worrying thought pops into your head, it’s like driving past a
car accident: you can’t not look at it. Thoughts of danger demand your
a ention for a reason. Your brain is o ering up a story for what might

be happening and if there is a chance of the worst-case scenario
happening, then you had be er be prepared.
As I explained in a previous chapter, your brain acts a bit like a smoke
alarm. Every time you sense a threat in your environment, that alarm
gets triggered and tells your body to get into survival mode. That is
called your ﬁght or ﬂight response. Your body gears up to either ﬁght
o that threat, or escape quicker than you ever thought you could
move.
A smoke alarm is made to go o when there is a ﬁre. A necessary
tool for survival. Just like the smoke alarm, anxiety can be triggered
even when we are not truly at risk. But when you burn the toast and
the smoke alarm sounds, you don’t remove the smoke alarm. If you
understand why it is there and how it works, you can start to work with
it, make adjustments, open a window. You get the idea. We cannot
remove our survival response. We would not want to. But we can learn
about what exacerbates it and make adjustments so that we can detect
a false alarm and act accordingly.

Get some distance
Thoughts are not facts. They are guesses, stories, memories, ideas and
theories. They are a construct o ered to you by your brain as one
potential explanation for the sensations you are experiencing right
now. We know they are not facts because they are so heavily
inﬂuenced by your physical state (hormones, blood pressure, heart rate,
digestion, hydration, to name just a few), by each of your senses, and
by your memories of past experience.
So what does this mean for those anxious thoughts that pop into our
heads? It means the power of that thought, and any other thought, is in
how much we buy into it. How much we believe that thought to be a
true reﬂection of reality. The best way to break down the power that
thoughts have over our emotional state is to ﬁrst get some distance

from them. How do we get distance from something that is inside our
head?
Ge ing distance from thoughts can be done in a number of ways.
Mindfulness is a great skill to start practising for building that ability to
be able to notice your thoughts and let them pass without ge ing
caught up in them. But being aware of the types of thought biases that
tend to arise when we are anxious also helps. If you can notice a
thought for what it is – a biased guess – and label it as such, then doing
that is one way of holding the thought at arm’s length. Your mind can
then see it as just one possible perspective. We are then in a much
be er position to be able to consider alternatives.
One way to get that distance from anxious thoughts is to use
distanced language. This helps to turn the dial down on the emotion.
Rather than saying ‘I am going to make a fool of myself during this
speech,’ say, ‘I’m having thoughts about making a fool of myself. I notice
those thoughts trigger feelings of anxiety.’ I know thinking or speaking
in this way may feel awkward at ﬁrst. But it makes a di erence in
helping you to step back from the thoughts and see them as an
experience, not as you.
Another way to get distance from those thoughts, and my personal
favourite, is to write them down. This is not exclusive to anxious
thoughts. Any time that you want to get some distance and a new
perspective on your emotional state or situation, write down
everything you are thinking and feeling. Seeing what you have wri en
on the page can be a powerful way to process and make sense of your
experience from a bird’s-eye view.

Spot biased thoughts that make you feel
worse
There are a few thought biases that commonly occur when we are
feeling anxious:

Catastrophizing
Catastrophizing is when your mind jumps to the worst possible scenario
and o ers it to you as a prediction of what might happen now. It plays
that out for you like your own personal horror movie on repeat in your
mind. It is one possible prediction, but not the only one. When we play
it over and over in our mind and buy into it as an absolute certainty,
anxiety goes up. In a previous chapter I mentioned my fear of heights
growing up and my early a empts to face it. At the top of the Leaning
Tower of Pisa, my thoughts that I was about to die were catastrophizing
thoughts that were repeated over and over. It turns out they were just
one possible ending to that story, as the actual ending went like this: I
walked back down the steps and continued with my holiday.

Personalizing
Personalizing is when we have some limited or ambiguous information
about the world and make it about us. For example, I’m walking down
the street and see a friend on the other side of the road. I call her name
and wave, but she doesn’t wave back. Immediately, my personalizing
thoughts tell me that she must hate me. I must have said something to
o end her. Maybe all our friends have been talking about me and I
thought I had friends but now I have none.
There are thousands of potential alternatives to the story my mind
has o ered as an explanation for this. Maybe she didn’t hear me. Maybe
she normally wears contact lenses. Maybe she has just had a huge ﬁght
at home and can’t bear to speak to anyone in case she bursts into tears
in the street. Maybe she was daydreaming. The list goes on and on. The
personalizing bias demands our a ention because it is threat-focused. If
my friends suddenly hate me, this is something I need to focus on.

Mental ﬁlter
The mental ﬁlter is that tendency for us to hold on to all the
information that makes us feel worse, and neglect all the information

that could help us feel di erently. Let’s say you post something on
social media and you get ﬁ y comments. Forty-nine of those
comments are positive and encouraging. One is negative and points out
something that you already felt insecure about. The mental ﬁlter is
when we focus our a ention on that one negative comment and
neglect to consider the other forty-nine. The mental ﬁlter was
deﬁnitely at play when I focused in on the fact that the Leaning Tower
of Pisa was leaning and failed to consider that it has remained standing
for hundreds of years and has a large team of professionals constantly
monitoring its safety.
The brain naturally wants to focus on threatening information
because its job is to keep us safe. If we are already stressed or anxious,
then the brain will do that even more. The brain receives the
information from the body that all is not well, and starts scanning the
environment (and your memory) for possible reasons. This is when the
mental ﬁlter kicks into action. Your brain is on a mission to make sense
of the anxiety symptoms. But, if we can notice the mental ﬁlter in
action, we can recognize the bias in the information we are focusing on
and intentionally choose to consider the other information available.

Overgeneralizing
Overgeneralizing is when we take one experience and apply it to all
experiences. If you interview for a job and get turned down,
overgeneralizing thoughts would sound like, ‘I’m never going to get a
job, so what’s the point of applying for anything else?’ or a er a
breakup, ‘I screw up every relationship so I’m not going to date ever
again.’ Overgeneralizing makes anxiety worse for a couple of reasons. It
leads to a more intense spike of emotion because it turns one problem
into a bigger, life problem. Secondly, it o en leads us to avoid the
situation in the future, which feeds anxiety and makes it much harder
to face.

Labelling

Labelling is similar to overgeneralizing but involves taking one event or
period of time and using that to make global judgements about who
you are as a person.
If you experience a period of anxiety in your life, and from that point
label yourself as an anxious person, you start to form a concept for
your self and your identity which then impacts on how you expect to
feel and behave in the future. Each emotion, behaviour and period in
our lives is temporary and not necessarily a reﬂection of who we are
permanently.
So, when you notice that you are labelling yourself as a certain type
of person, don’t let it go unchecked. Doing so has an impact on the
emotions that are constructed by your brain in the future. Instead,
acknowledging the speciﬁcs of the experience as a temporary one
helps to distance you as a person from the experiences that you
encounter along the way. It’s much harder to change an identity as an
anxious person than it is to simply reduce anxiety.

Fact check
Since the power of any thought is in how much we believe it to be a
true reﬂection of reality, ‘thought challenging’ can be a helpful process
for many. If a thought is causing you distress, it makes sense to work
out whether it is fake news or worth feeling so anxious about. Thought
challenging is a simple process. When you start, it’s easier to do it in
hindsight, a er the event has passed. If you notice anxious thoughts
you can follow these steps to challenge them.
1. Write down the anxious thought.
2. Draw a line down the centre of your page to make two columns.
Like a lawyer weighing up the facts, write down a list of all the
evidence that the thought is a true fact. Evidence only counts if it
would stand up in court as evidence.
3. In the second column, list all the evidence that the thought is not a
fact.

4. If the exercise reveals the anxious thought to be less factual than
you initially believed, then it is a good time to start considering
alternative ways to think about the situation.
This exercise is very simple but can be helpful to just loosen our initial
belief in the thought and open up the opportunity to consider
alternative interpretations.
However, if you ﬁnd this just leads to an internal argument about
how true the thought is, that is when this technique becomes less
helpful. If that happens, leave the thought-challenging exercise and
instead use the other techniques that focus on distancing yourself from
the thought.

Spotlight of attention
It’s New Year’s Day 2010. I am pulling on a crusty blue boiler suit and
zipping it up at the front with my eyes closed. I take a deep breath, as if
it’s going to be the last breath I take. I feel sick. I wipe the sweat from
my palms down the front of the boiler suit. I open my eyes and
Ma hew is grinning at me.
‘Ready?’ His smile is so wide he looks like he has a hanger in his
mouth.
I do not smile back.
‘No.’ I take another breath and my shoulders li . They stay up high
and tense as I breathe out through pursed lips. Why on earth did I
agree to this? We move towards the door leading to the underside of
the Sydney Harbour Bridge. I start nodding my head and telling myself I
can do this. We move out on to a narrow metal grating and I can see
through it to the ground. Some profanities leave my mouth and I grip
tightly on to the metal bars on either side. I want to cry. Ma asks if I’m
all right and tells me to keep moving forward. His words are like a
match to a ﬂame and I snap back at him.
‘I am moving! Whose ****ing idea was this! I hate this!’ I then realize I
am still only on the underside of the bridge and it’s only ge ing worse.

When we get up on to the steps to climb the bridge, the muscles in my
legs are shaking so violently that they hurt already. I’m vaguely aware
that I’m making quiet noises that are somewhere between whimpering
and groaning. I know there is no way back, so I keep pu ing one foot in
front of the other. As we reach the top of the bridge, 134 metres high,
the guide stops and turns.
‘Why is he stopping? Why is he stopping?’ More profanities under the
breath.
He says something about the view and I’m not interested. He then
asks us all to turn around and look behind us. I don’t want to take either
of my hands o the metal bars that I have been gripping, so I turn my
body as much as I can without le ing go.
That’s when I see Ma kneeling down, holding out a ring box.
The tears were already there, ready to roll. I manage to let go of the
bars for a split second so I can turn around fully, before gripping them
again.
All the way through our beautiful moment my hands remain tightly
gripped to the handrail.
The group applaud and start moving forward to cross the centre of
the bridge and come down the other side. We take a moment to talk. I
start asking about how he managed to arrange this. He explains as we
walk across the centre of the bridge and scale back down the steps on
the other side. I’m smiling and laughing and shaking my head. Ma
explains that family who live here in Sydney, and his family members
who came on the trip with us, are all watching from the restaurant
opposite the steps we are descending on. I look across and see them all
waving. I wave back with one hand and hold the ring up with the other.
Then I realize, I’m not holding on. I haven’t been holding on the
whole way down.
Our brains take in and process a lot of information every second of
every day. But the world around us o ers inﬁnite amounts of
information. If your brain was to try and process everything, you would
not be able to function. So the brain makes choices about what to
focus on. Our a ention is like a spotlight. We have control of that

spotlight, but we cannot control the actors who come on stage. We
cannot control how long they spend there, what they say, or when they
leave. What we get to do is focus that spotlight on one or two of them
at a time. If we se le our focus on the anxious thoughts that tell stories
of worst-case scenarios and images of you not coping, they get the
chance to feed back to the brain that all is not well. When you shi the
spotlight of your a ention to other thoughts on the stage that o er a
di erent story, they will have their inﬂuence on your bodily reaction
too. While you are focusing on them, the other thoughts may not leave
the stage. They may stick around, waiting for the spotlight again. But
without it, they have less power over your emotional state.
The story of my engagement is rather an extreme example, but one
that has stayed with me on the power of the focus of a ention. All the
way up the bridge, I was focused on how I might accidentally die that
day. All the way down, I was focused on living.
Of course we can’t rely on a surprise proposal to shi our a ention
away from our catastrophizing thoughts every day. But exercising the
power to direct your spotlight of a ention is a powerful tool. It is not
the same as blocking thoughts out. As soon as you try to eliminate a
thought from your mind and not have it at all, the thought pops up
more than ever. This is how people get stuck in loops with intrusive
thoughts. If you are not willing to have it, you will. By thinking about
how you don’t want to have those anxious thoughts, you are directing
your spotlight on to them. When you choose to move the spotlight on
to other thoughts, the anxious thoughts may remain on the stage. You
are still aware of their presence, but they are not the star of the show.
When those anxious thoughts arise and you put the spotlight on
them and start to ruminate over that feared event in the future, doing
so causes your body to respond. Not only that, each time that you play
out the worst-case scenario in your mind, of something awful
happening and you not coping with it, you are constructing an
experience that your brain uses to help build your concepts or
templates for the world. The more you repeat that, the easier it
becomes for your brain to re-create it.

Where you direct the spotlight of your a ention helps to construct
your experience. So learning to take control of that spotlight is truly an
investment in your future emotional experience of the world.
So what if there are no other actors on the stage? How do we
choose what else to think, when we are well practised at worrying?

What to focus on instead – a new self-talk
Anxious thoughts are threat-focused. When we spend time with them,
they feed back to your body and brain to ramp up the threat response.
To turn the dial down on that threat response we instead need to
cultivate a thought stream that promotes calm.
When my son had an operation at the age of two and a half, the
swelling of his face caused his eyes to seal shut. He awoke from a nap
unable to open his eyes. He could hear all the strange sounds of the
high dependency unit. Lots of beeping machines, footsteps and voices
he didn’t recognize. His threat response ﬁred up and he screamed for
me. He was inconsolable until I arrived back in the room, held my hands
on his and spoke to him. I could not make him see. I could not change
his pain. I did not have any magic words to make it all go away. I simply
spoke calmly in his ear, le ing him know that I was there and he was
safe. The person who had his back was here and going nowhere. From
that moment on, his ability to accept and move through this frightening
situation was nothing short of extraordinary. Over the next few days
his eyes remained closed but he continued with life, playing with his
toys and enjoying himself. Compassion had helped him to feel safe
enough to face the world, even when all was not OK.
When we receive kindness and compassion, it turns the dial down on
our threat response and allows us to feel safer. This happens whether
that kindness comes from another person or from our own thoughts.
Changing the way you speak to yourself changes your brain chemistry
and your emotional state.

It is not easy. One day of self-compassion is not going to overturn a
lifetime of practising self-criticism and self-a ack. It is a life-practice
that needs constant work. But it can be life-changing. Remember,
compassion is not always the easy thing. It is not saying there is nothing
to be scared of. It is the coach in your ear with a calm and ﬁrm voice
that is encouraging you, supporting you, reminding you that you can
and will move through this moment.
One of my favourite ways to turn my a ention to a compassionate
thought process is to ask myself, if I was coaching a friend through this,
what would I say and how would I say it? The best kind of coach is not
one who swoops in to rescue you, but one who is honest with you and
encourages you to ﬁnd the strength within yourself to move through
di cult moments, so that you may discover your own strength.

Reframing
At the end of clinical training, I had to undergo a viva exam. This is an
exam that is more like an interview, in which you sit in front of a panel
of experts and answer questions on your research. On the day of my
exam I arrived at the university and entered the waiting room where
we had to sit before we were called in. As I sat there listening to my
heart pound, a fellow trainee returned to the waiting room with tears
streaming down her face. She was sobbing as a member of sta put an
arm around her shoulders and led her out of the waiting room. All
remaining pairs of eyes in the waiting room widened and looked at
each other in terror. Something jumped in all our stomachs. I stood up
and moved out of the room, passing a tutor who wished me luck. Then
he gave me one of the best pieces of advice I ever received.
He told me to try and enjoy the exam. He told me that this was an
opportunity to show o everything I had learned and worked on during
these years of training. He said this was the one and only time that
anyone would read the entirety of my thesis and show genuine interest
in it, so it was my chance to enjoy sharing that interest. I returned to

the waiting room nodding and smiling. What I didn’t recognize until I
was on safer ground was how he had helped me to reframe the entire
experience. Nothing changed about the high-pressure situation I was
facing. But I went from a rabbit in headlights to creating an experience
that included a mix of courage, pleasure and excitement.
In the same way that my viva exam was reframed from a risk to a
challenge, you can use this same technique with other experiences that
you might otherwise interpret as a threat or something you can’t cope
with. Reframing does not mean that you deny the inherent risks in a
given situation. There was still a risk of failing my exam. But if I chose
to focus exclusively on that risk then my stress response might have
been much higher and I probably would have found it much more
di cult to perform.
Reframing is when you allow yourself to consider reinterpreting the
situation in a way that is going to help you move through it. Reframing
an experience as a challenge can help us to shi from the ﬂight urge to
a somewhat more controlled ﬁght urge. We can move towards
something with intention. The next step can help to put reframing into
place.

Consider values and identity
When anxious thoughts are dominating the spotlight, we need to bring
on stage the thoughts about what ma ers most to us. It makes sense
to base some decisions on fear. If your life is at risk, that is when those
thoughts are most valuable to us. But life becomes more rich and full
when we make our decisions based on our values and what ma ers
most.
An easy way to do this is to come back to questions such as ‘Why is
this so important to me? In a year from now, when I look back on this
moment, what action or response would make me proud and grateful?
What kind of person do I want to be in this situation? What do I want
to stand for?’

Your values can become a part of your identity too. Whether you
want to be an adventurous person or a ﬁt and healthy person or a
sociable and friendly person, being clear on that can help you bring
forward an alternative set of thoughts to the anxious ones. If you feel
anxious about starting a conversation but you have decided that you
are going to see yourself as someone who is sociable and friendly, this
helps to create a template, a concept for how you will behave in social
situations, even when anxiety is whispering in your ear to avoid
conversation. Or perhaps I choose my identity to be someone who lives
with courage, then I can ask myself how I would respond to this
situation. What would my next move be if it was based on courage?
What response would make me proud to write in my journal tonight
and look back on this time next year?

Chapter summary
Get some distance from anxious thoughts by labelling the
biases when you spot them.
Remember that, even when anxious thoughts demand
constant a ention, you can control the spotlight of your
a ention.
Kindness turns the dial down on our threat response, whether
that kindness comes from someone else or inside your own
head.
Reframing a threat as a challenge invites us to be courageous.
Act in line with your values so that you are basing your
decisions on what ma ers most, not on fear.

CHAPTER 26

Fear of the inevitable
The fear of all fears is that of our own mortality. Every human lives
with this one inevitability that life must come to an end and the
ultimate uncertainty that we don’t know exactly when or how it will
happen. This fear of the known and the unknown constantly threatens
to undermine our peace and contentment in the here and now. Even
thinking about the prospect of our own death can make us feel
instantly powerless and frightened, while at the same time triggering a
sense of the meaninglessness of life.
For some, the fear of death invades everyday life in a direct way that
causes us to worry about the prospect of death at every turn. For
others it can bubble up in unexpected ways, disguised as other,
seemingly smaller fears around health and risk-taking. Both have the
potential to disrupt and even destroy our quality of life.
It has been argued that a fear of death underlies many other mental
health problems (Iverach et al., 2014). Health anxiety ﬁlls us with fear of
ge ing sick and going to hospital, with the possibility of dying in pain.
Those who experience panic a acks commonly misinterpret the
pounding heart for a heart a ack and the terror of believing that they
are about to die triggers a panic a ack. Many speciﬁc phobias, whether
it is of heights, snakes or blood, all centre around predictions that death
is more possible when in contact with those things.
The prospect of death is constant throughout our lives, but we
cannot live in that constant state of fear. So we protect ourselves by
ﬁlling our lives with safety behaviours that protect us from its constant
threat. We may put strict limitations on any risk-taking, we strive for

concepts of immortality through fame or fortune, by our connections
to others and how we wish to be remembered by them. And who can
blame us? Irvin Yalom, Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry at Stanford
University, describes it perfectly in his book, Staring at the Sun.
‘It’s not easy to live every moment wholly aware of death. It’s like
trying to stare the sun in the face: you can stand only so much of it.’
He also suggests that ‘though the physicality of death destroys us,
the idea of death saves us’. In this sense, our very human anxiety
around death is not just a discomfort to be eliminated. Confronting our
awareness of death can also become a profound tool for ﬁnding new
meaning and purpose in how we live. The fact that we all die can deﬁne
the meaning that we give to life and help us choose how we live with
more careful intention. In the same respect, the meaning that we
a ach to death can impact on our wellbeing today (Neimeyer, 2005).
In my own research with breast cancer survivors, many of them
reported positive life transformations that they a ributed to being
faced with death. The experience triggers a surge in fear while also
inviting them to re-evaluate what meaning they were going to place on
their ﬁnite time. Higher scores on trauma reactions were associated
with more post-traumatic growth and positive life transformation.
But we don’t have to come so close to death to face what it means
to us. In Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) we can do this
by exploring the idea of our own funeral or thinking about our own
personal heroes who are no longer alive. These exercises invite us to
consider living, not in spite of the fact that it will all end, but because of
it. Coming face to face with the questions about what you want your
life to stand for can open us up to both turmoil and transformation.
While it can be painful, it is not about dwelling on that anguish but to
empower choice. For example, you imagine that you have been able to
live your life according to what ma ers most to you. Then you allow
yourself to consider what that would look like. If you had lived with the
meaning and purpose that you chose, how would you behave day to
day? What would you work hard on? What would you let go? What
would you commit to, even if you might not be able to complete it?

Exploring death in that way can help us get clear on what ma ers
now.
Our fear of death seems impossible to eliminate because we know it
is going to happen. The fear is understandable and the prediction is
realistic. But our unrealistic beliefs around death make a rational fear
worse. Much worse, to the point that it can interfere with normal dayto-day life. Those beliefs might be something like, ‘My family won’t be
able to cope without me,’ or ‘The pain of death will be torturous.’
If we talk about our fear of death, most people respond with an
a empt to reduce our fear by challenging the probability that it will
happen any time soon. This is o en well-intentioned but not helpful, as
we all know that it will happen eventually and we all know that it can
happen without warning. When we try to avoid the fear of death by
making ourselves feel safe from it right now, that same fear will
inevitably pop up again somewhere else when we are reminded of life’s
fragility.
What we are looking for is the need for deep acceptance of the
certainty of death as a part of life and the uncertainty of how it will
come about. For some, those two facts of life are the source of
meaning for life itself. For others, we try not to think about it and live
as if it might not happen if we stay safe enough. We avoid anything to
do with death. We avoid talking about it and seeing it. Those avoidance
pa erns build up around things that we perceive as risky and our
estimates about the level of risk start to increase along with the level
of our anxiety about it.
When this happens, multiple phobias can pop up through your life.
But unless we address the fear of death, one phobia calms only for
another one to pop up a li le while later.
So what can we do if we are consumed with fear of the worst and we
know it will deﬁnitely happen? Ultimately, if we want to live fully
without day-to-day life being disrupted by our fear of death, ﬁnding
our own way towards acceptance about death as a part of life is
something we must do. Acceptance is not saying that death is

something we want. It is giving up the struggle against the parts of our
reality that we cannot control.
Acceptance of death is not the same as giving up on life. Quite the
opposite. Acceptance of death allows us to bring meaning to life. In
turn, building a sense of meaning in life and ge ing to work on living in
line with that can allow us to accept death as a part of life.
It can change the way we live. We can live in a way that is informed
by our values and has meaning. We can pay more a ention to those
things that ma er most to us and live with purpose.
The loss of someone we know and the resultant grief can put us in
touch with our own mortality. If that person can die unexpectedly, then
so can I. What does this mean for me and my life? What meaning does
today have?

Changing our relationship with death
There are di erent ways that people cultivate a sense of acceptance
around death. Three of these, listed below, were originally proposed by
Gesser, Wong and Reker (1988).
Approach acceptance – Holding beliefs about an a erlife or the
possibility of going to some form of heaven enables the individual
to cultivate acceptance of their own mortality.
Escape acceptance – For those who experience great su ering in
their life, death may be accepted or even embraced as it is
perceived as possible relief or escape from that su ering.
Neutral acceptance – This is when death is perceived as neither
desirable nor a means of escape from su ering, but as a natural
part of life that we have no control over.
Try this: A task sometimes used in ACT is to imagine being able

to write your own epitaph. If you were able to write just a few
lines on your own gravestone, what would you most want it to

say? This is not a guess at what others might say, but a way for
you to explore what you want to stand for. The meaning you
wish to live by, starting from today (Hayes, 2005).
For anyone who may struggle with these exercises, working with the
support of a therapist is advisable.
Try exploring some of your own beliefs around death that make the
fear worse. We each hold numerous beliefs around death that are
either helpful to us or detrimental. One example might be that death is
somehow unfair and we shouldn’t have to go through it. Such a belief is
likely to feed the anxiety and increase distress when thoughts of death
arise. Exploring and taking time to challenge some of those beliefs is
worthwhile. However, some of this work is so emotive that it helps to
do it alongside someone you trust. That may be someone you know or
a therapist who can help to guide you through it.
Toolkit: Writing to unravel our fears around death

Expressive writing on the subject can help us explore fear of death
because it allows us to pull away and ground ourselves without losing
the thread of our insights and discoveries along the way. You can stop
at any time and then return to the task when you are ready.
Facing a fear of death is not easy, and this is where a highly trained
therapist can make a huge di erence. For those who don’t have access
to such options, connecting with a trusted friend or loved one can also
be a great support, as this is something we all face.
Here are some prompt questions you can use in journalling, therapy
or supported conversation with a loved one.
What are your fears about death? How do they show up in your
day-to-day life?
Which of your beliefs about death are di erent to others?
What do these di erences tell us?
How have your past experiences of endings or loss shaped your
beliefs about life and death so far?

What behaviours do you engage in that help you feel safe from
death?
What would you like your life to mean or represent?
What footprints would you like to leave a er your time here?
How can that meaning translate into real actions and choices that
you make today and as you move forward into this next chapter of
your life?
Imagine that far into the future you were near the end of your life
and looking back on this chapter that is just beginning. If you were
to look back with a smile on your face, feeling content and
satisﬁed with the choices you made and the way you approached
each day, what would daily life need to look like?
If this next chapter of your life was to become the most
meaningful and purposeful, what would it include?
If your awareness of death was to enhance your life rather than
diminish it, what would that look like?

Chapter summary
Our collective fear of death is a fear of both the known and
the unknown.
For some people, coming close to death brings about growth
and positive life transformation.
Acceptance of death is not the same as giving up on life.
Quite the opposite.
Acceptance of death allows us to bring meaning to life.

CHAPTER 27

Is stress different from
anxiety?
Stress and anxiety are both terms that have become widely used as
umbrella terms for a diverse set of experiences. It is not unusual to hear
people say that they were stressed and so their anxiety got worse. Or
they might say the opposite. The result is that most people use the
words interchangeably to describe an almost inﬁnite number of
experiences. They might be stressed about work deadlines or anxious
about ﬁnding a spider in the bathroom. You might feel stressed because
you had to wait in a queue at the post o ce that made you late. But
you might also describe dealing with stress at losing your job and
struggling to pay rent. The next person might describe both of those as
anxiety-provoking.
But you’ll notice that the two are each given their own sections in
this book. The experience of what we call stress is constructed through
the same mechanisms in the brain as emotions are (Feldman Barre ,
2017). Your brain is constantly receiving information from your body
about the demands of the outside world and trying to work out how
much e ort is needed. It tries to match the amount of energy being
released in the body to the demands from the outside world, to ensure
that nothing is wasted. When our internal physiological state feels well
matched to the environment, we mostly interpret that as a positive
feeling, even when it involves stress, for example, when you feel
pumped and ready for a big sports competition. But when that internal
environment is not matched to the demands of the external world, we

tend to interpret that as negative. When we are tired but wired and
can’t get to sleep. Or when we are so stressed that we can’t seem to
focus on the questions in an exam or job interview. At such times we
tend to experience the prediction that we cannot cope with current
demands.
Stress and anxiety are both associated with states of alertness. But
for the purposes of this book, anxiety is associated with the feeling of
fear and the excessive worry thoughts that come along with that
experience. In contrast, the stress that you feel in the line at the post
o ce would have a di erent meaning to that of anxiety. If you felt
stressed in the line, that might be because you had a tight schedule of
things to get done that day. That spike in stress would increase your
alertness to help you make a decision about whether to continue in the
line or re-prioritize in order to meet your expectations of the day. If
the feeling was anxiety, it is likely to be associated with worry thoughts
and predictions that something threatening or dangerous might
happen.
So while the mechanisms of stress and anxiety are the same, we
conceptualize them in di erent ways. If you are lying in bed and hear
glass breaking downstairs, your stress response will ﬁre up but you are
more likely to frame that sensation as anxiety and fear. You might have
the urge to ﬁght o the threat or escape. That same stress response is
given di erent meaning when you are carrying around the threat of
unemployment or struggling to manage the demands of both a job and
parenting. Those things are not perceived as immediate danger. We
cannot ﬁght them or escape them in the same way.
So while we have simpliﬁed that stress response down to a ﬁght or
ﬂight, in reality there are many ways in which the stress response can
vary. There can be di erences in the ratio of hormones released,
cardiovascular changes and other physiological responses that combine
to form di erent psychological experiences and di erent behavioural
urges.
We feel stress when our brain is preparing us to do something.
Whether that thing is to get up in the morning, start a work

presentation or drive your car, your brain gives out energy to increase
alertness and ensure you are ready to react to your environment,
whatever that may be. Cortisol, which we all think of as the damaging
stress hormone, is actually enabling the quick release of energy in the
form of glucose into your bloodstream for fuel. Your lungs and heart
start working faster to deliver the necessary energy from oxygen and
sugar to the major muscles and the brain. The adrenaline and cortisol
then help your muscles to make the most e cient use of that energy.
You are geared up ready to face whatever challenges you are presented
with. This is your body working at its best. Your senses sharpen and
your brain is processing information more rapidly.
When your brain gives out those resources, it expects to get
something back for it in terms of rest or nutrients. But when it does not
get anything back, there is a shortfall. If that happens repeatedly, your
body’s resources are not replenished. If you’re not sleeping enough or
eating well, or if you are arguing with your spouse every day, the
shortfall gets bigger. Over time that depleted body struggles to defend
itself and becomes vulnerable to illness.
If you are faced with a threat to your survival, the experience will be
the ﬁght or ﬂight response. But when you perceive a stressful situation
that is not such an immediate threat, you may experience more of a
challenge response which allows you to rise to the challenge in much
the same way, but the sensations feel less like intense fear and more
like agitation to move.
Anticipatory stress is experienced when we can predict that
something stressful is coming up and will demand a lot from us. You
know you are going to feel nervous and stressed in that job interview
next week, so you start anticipating that challenge ahead of time.
When we get it wrong and keep predicting that we will face a challenge
that we cannot cope with, we become anxious as we start to fear the
physiological and psychological discomfort of that stress. When the
stress is triggered by a physical threat and the body is activated to
move, the process of moving and reaching safety invites the body to
come back to baseline. But if we keep triggering the stress response for

those psychological reasons, then the physiological upheaval is not so
short term and there is no clear path for bringing back calm. That is
when we start to get into trouble with e ects on physical health,
mental health and behaviour (Sapolsky, 2017).

Chapter summary
The terms stress and anxiety are o en used interchangeably.
When we are able to meet the demands of our environment
we tend to feel good, even when that involves stress.
What we feel as stress is when our brain is preparing us to do
something.
The brain allows the release of energy to increase your
alertness and react to your environment.
We conceptualize anxiety as a more fear-based response. But
this is one way the overall stress response can vary to meet
your needs.

CHAPTER 28

Why reducing stress is not the
only answer
Reducing stress where we can is generally a good idea. But reducing the
stress in your life is so frequently o ered as a stress management
solution and it has never sat comfortably with me. One reason is that it
is a vague term that nobody really knows what to do with, and the
second is because many stressors are non-negotiable.
While some stress in our lives is stress that we choose (the stress
leading up to a sports competition or preparing for a big event like a
wedding), the most intense stress we face is o en not optional. A highpressure situation might be a boxer entering the ring but it might also
be entering the hospital to ﬁnd out the results of your biopsy. It is
working through your ﬁnances and realizing you might lose your home.
These are the moments that bring huge stress responses and need realtime tools to help us deal with them in the healthiest, most e cient
way possible.
We humans have a love-hate relationship with stress. We love the
thrill of a horror movie or the speed of the rollercoaster. We actively
choose these spikes in our stress response and we anticipate them with
huge excitement. We may feel out of control, but we know it’s just for a
moment. We feel afraid, but at the same time we trust that we will live
to tell the tale. We maintain enough control to stop the experience at
any time. Too li le stress and life is boring. Just enough and life is
engaging, fun and challenging. Too much and all of those beneﬁts can

be lost (Sapolsky, 2017). We need a ﬁne balance between predictability
and adventure.
In just the same way that emotions are not all bad, stress is not all
bad either. It is not a malfunction or weakness of our brain or body. It is
a series of signals that we can use to help us understand what we need.
Stress has positive e ects in the short term. The release of
adrenaline in the stress response helps to ﬁght both bacterial and viral
infection in the body. It increases heart rate, sharpens cognitive
function and dilates the pupils. All of this helps you to narrow your
focus, evaluate your environment and respond to meet its demands on
you.
We are led to believe by the popular view that stress is an outdated
survival mechanism that is no longer necessary. This means that when
we start to feel its e ects, the pounding heart and the sweaty palms,
we believe we’re failing to cope or the body is le ing us down. It is seen
as a fault in the system or a signal of disorder that needs to be shut
down. But the story is not so black and white. Stress is not always
harmful and our main aim does not always need to be to eliminate it.
Science has taught us about the dangers of stress but has also
revealed a more complete story about its function, how we can use it
to our advantage, and how best to replenish our mind and body to stop
stress from becoming dangerous.
So when you feel those signs of stress as you start a presentation at
work or in school, your body is helping you to perform at your best. In
those situations, we don’t want complete calm and relaxation. We want
to be alert and clear-thinking so that we can achieve whatever goal we
are working on at the time. What we don’t want is for that stress to be
so high that it has a detrimental e ect on our performance or causes us
to escape and avoid. Learning how to turn the dial down on that stress
when we don’t need it and turn it up when we do need it is the
foundation of healthy stress management.
We cannot untangle stress from a meaningful life. Whatever your
unique personal values, anything that you strive towards and work for is
going to require your stress response to get you there. The stress

response is a major tool in enabling us to reach our goals. It is o en the
things that are most important to us that have the potential to bring
most stress. If it ma ers, it is worth moving for. So experiencing stress
is not just an indication of problems or warning signs for health issues.
It can also reﬂect a life in which we are acting on things that we care
greatly about and living a life with purpose and meaning. If we can
learn how to use it to our advantage, and turn down the intensity when
we need to, then stress can be our most valuable tool.

Chapter summary
Stress is not always the enemy. It is also our most valuable
tool.
Learning to replenish a er a period of stress is more realistic
than trying to eliminate it.
Stress helps you to perform and do what ma ers but we were
not built to be in a constant state of stress.
We need stress for a fun and challenging life, but too much
and the beneﬁts are lost.

CHAPTER 29

When good stress goes bad
The stress response works at its best when it is short term and limited.
When our circumstances cause continued stress that we cannot change,
or we don’t know how to bring that stress back down, our body is not
replenished for its e ort. Imagine driving along the motorway at speed
in second gear. There is only so long you can keep that up before
damage is done.
When stress becomes sustained over long periods, our brain tends
towards more habitual behaviours that demand less energy. Our ability
to control our impulses, remember information and make decisions
becomes impaired. Over time, our immune system is a ected. In the
short term, adrenaline gives our immune function a boost to help ﬁght
bacterial and viral infections. But in the longer term, over-production of
adrenaline and abnormal pa erns of cortisol are linked with shorter life
expectancy (Kumari et al., 2011). When adrenaline is repeatedly
propping up our immune system through chronic stress and then we
stop and the adrenaline goes down, so does the immune system. This is
why you o en hear of people who work incredibly hard around the
clock for months on end and when they ﬁnally stop to take a holiday
they almost immediately fall ill.
Burnout is a term used to describe the response to excessive and
prolonged stress at work, although paid employment is not the only
environment in which we can experience burnout. Anyone in a caring
role, parenting role or volunteering role may also experience burnout.
People o en describe feeling emotionally exhausted and drained, as
if they are running on fumes and have no resources le . They may

notice feeling detached from other people, or themselves. They o en
report feeling that they lack competence at work or at home and no
longer have that same feeling of accomplishment they once had from
those things.
Burnout happens when that short-term stress response that we have
is repeatedly triggered over a prolonged period, without enough
chance to rest and restore in between. There is o en a chronic
mismatch between the individual and one of the following:
1. Control – Living in a situation in which you do not have the
resources needed to meet the demands you are faced with.
2. Reward – This might be ﬁnancial in an employment scenario. But
equally, it can be a sense of social recognition or acknowledgement
of value, either in a work environment or any other.
3. Community – A lack of positive human interaction and the sense
that one has social support or a sense of belonging.
4. Fairness – When there is perceived inequality in any of the other
factors in this list. When some people have their needs met more
than others or demands fall on some more than others.
5. Values – When the demands you face are in direct conﬂict with
your personal values.

Let’s be clear. Burnout is a serious health issue. Anyone who thinks they
may be experiencing burnout needs to act as soon as possible. But we
also have to be realistic. Some pressures you can say no to (like taking
on that side hustle on top of a 50-hour working week) but others you
can’t (such as physical illness or ﬁnancial pressures or the emotional
strain of a relationship breakdown).
When you are ﬁghting to keep a roof over your head and feed your
children every day by working two jobs, and trying to be the best
parent you can in between, there is no option to just remove stress
from your life and take on an idyllic morning routine of meditation and
yoga. But addressing burnout does not need to look like a holiday
photo. Living with high demands and the associated stress while looking
a er your health is a balancing act in which you will sway from one

direction to the other. There is no silver bullet that will ﬁx everything.
What works to help one person balance demands will not be realistic
for the next.
When we are not able to turn that dial down on stress, or we are
overloaded for too long, that stress can become chronic. The signs of
chronic stress di er between individuals, but I have listed a few below.
Signs of chronic long-term stress:
Disturbed sleep on a regular basis.
Changes in appetite.
More frequent agitation and irritability that may impact on
relationships.
Problems concentrating and focusing on tasks.
Problems switching o and resting even when exhausted.
Persistent headaches or dizziness.
Muscle pain and tension.
Stomach problems.
Sexual problems.
Increased dependence on addictive behaviours such as smoking,
drinking or over-eating.
Feeling overwhelmed and avoiding small stressors that would
normally feel manageable.
Try this: If you think you may be experiencing burnout, try
answering the following questions. Then spend some time
reﬂecting on your answers and what this means for you. There
are validated measures of burnout (Kristensen et al., 2005 and
Maslach et al., 1996) but you are the expert of your own
experience. Reﬂecting on how your current situation is
inﬂuencing your health can help you to acknowledge when
things need to change.

How o en do you feel emotionally drained?

When you wake up in the morning, do you feel exhausted at the
thought of everything you have to do?
When you do have free time, are you le with enough energy to
enjoy that time?
Do you feel persistently susceptible to physical illness?
Do you feel able to deal with problems as and when they arise?
Do you feel that your e orts and accomplishments are
worthwhile?
The communication between brain and body goes both ways. This
means that when your body is under stress for extended periods, the
persistent messages about this make changes to your very adaptable
brain that is trying to regulate your body. This is why stress is so very
damaging to both physical and mental health. It a ects all aspects and
every part of you (McEwen & Gianaros, 2010).
In the balancing act of managing stress and using it to our advantage
while remaining healthy, we need to balance incoming demands with
replenishment. The more demands on us, the more replenishment we
need. The more stress pouring into the bucket, the more release valves
we need to process it and make room for the ongoing demands.

Figure 9: The stress curve. A certain degree of stress will help you perform at
your best. Go beyond that, and your performance declines.

The good news is that we can reduce the e ects of stress on the
body with a few simple tools that I will describe in the next chapter.

Chapter summary
The stress response works at its best when it is short term.
Chronic stress is like trying to drive your car on the motorway
in second gear. There is only so long before damage is done.
Burnout is not just a workplace issue.
There is no silver bullet that works for everything. The right
balance for one person will be unrealistic for another.
If you are showing signs of burnout, listen to them and
respond now by starting to meet your needs.

CHAPTER 30

Making stress work for you
In the previous section on fear I talked about using breathing
techniques as a fast way to calm the body and mind (see pages 200–
202). Those techniques are just as helpful with stress. Your breathing
can directly impact on your heart rate and level of stress or calm. When
you inhale, the diaphragm moves down, creating more space in the
chest which allows the heart to expand further and the rate of the
blood ﬂow to slow down. When the brain receives the information
about this, its job is to then send a signal to speed up the heart.
In contrast when you breathe out, the diaphragm moves up leaving a
smaller space for the heart and so the blood passes through quicker.
This causes your brain to send signals to slow your heart down.
When outbreaths are longer and more forceful than inbreaths, this
slows the heart rate and calms the body.
When the inbreaths are longer than the outbreaths, we become
more alert and activated.
Therefore, one of the most immediate ways to start calming your stress
response is to make your exhales longer and more forceful than the
inbreaths.
It’s worth noting that the aim when you are feeling overwhelmed
with stress is not to go from agitated and worried to a relaxed and
meditative state. When the world is demanding of us we want to be
alert. As you use breathing techniques such as this one, you will notice
that your mind’s ability to think more clearly and problem-solve

becomes more available to you. In that sense, we are not trying to
make it all go away and induce ultimate relaxation, but to put you in
the best state possible in which you are able to use the advantages of
the stress response (e.g. alertness) and bring down the intensity of the
disadvantages (e.g. worry and overwhelm).
However, if you are pu ing time aside to practise relaxation or have
interest in using breath work, then you can use this technique over
longer periods to bring about the physical state of deep relaxation.
That tends to be when you have more time and no distractions or
current demands, so that you can use longer outbreaths or other
relaxation techniques to help you relax. But when you are in the
moment and you need to perform, then the breathing technique is a
good choice for helping you get through the moment.

Turning to others
I’m sure most parents can relate to the experience of lying in bed and
running through in their minds what they’d do in the event of a house
ﬁre. You run through each possible scenario of how you could grab each
of your children as quickly as possible. How does that need to protect
ﬁt into a ﬁght or ﬂight mode? Fight or ﬂight does not tell the whole
story. Connection with and protection of others is just as much a part
of our survival instinct as ﬁghting that ﬁre or escaping from it. Some
stressful situations may lead to more selﬁsh behaviour, but other
scenarios lead us to be even more caring towards others.
Research also shows that when we do focus on caring for others in
times of stress it changes our brain chemistry in such a way that
produces feelings of both hope and courage (Inagaki et al., 2012). It
even helps to protect us from the harmful e ects of long-term chronic
stress and trauma. So it becomes a source of resilience (McGonigal,
2012). This tend-and-befriend stress response may have evolved for
the protection of o spring, but the stress response is generic, which
means we can apply those same feelings of courage to any scenario

that you encounter. Connecting with others helps us recover from
stress.
Social isolation in itself places the mind and body under great stress.
Greeting people we love in person and engaging fully in our
relationships mitigates the e ects of short-term and long-term stress.

Goals
So much of what we are exposed to, especially in the self-improvement
industry, is about being your best, standing out from the crowd and
being exceptional. One of the ﬁrst questions you hear when you meet
new people is ‘What do you do?’ A fair question, but one that reﬂects
our focus on careers. Life goals are o en set from a competitive
standpoint, everyone striving to prove themselves as enough with
symbols of achievement. We are led to believe that happiness is
somewhere beyond becoming exceptional. Many people who discover
di erently have had to learn the hard way through burnout and mental
health crises.
But science is beginning to unravel this fallacy. Those who build their
life on self-focused goals are more vulnerable to depression, anxiety
and loneliness. Whereas those who structure their goals on something
bigger than the self tend to feel more hopeful, grateful, inspired,
excited and experience be er wellbeing and life satisfaction (Crocker
et al., 2009). Of course, we all have times when we focus on the self
and times when we focus on goals that are bigger than the self. We
have the ability to shi between these mindsets, which is crucial. We
only have to spend a small amount of time reﬂecting on how our
choices and e orts might help a greater cause in order to shi our
experience of stress. When we focus on how our actions, big or small,
can help others, we show less stress response in di cult and
demanding situations (Abelson et al., 2014).
So what does this mean in the real world? When we make a
conscious e ort during stressful events to link our engagement to our

values and to make a di erence to others, we ﬁnd the stress easier to
cope with. We change the meaning of our struggle in such a way that
we are motivated to persevere rather than to escape and avoid the
stress. The test becomes less threatening because it is no longer about
proving our self-worth. Our self-worth becomes inherent in our e orts
to make a di erence.
Try this: How to shi from self-focused to something bigger.
When you feel under stress and you notice the urge to escape or
avoid, take some time to return to a values check-in. Ask yourself
questions like:

How does this e ort or goal ﬁt with my values?
What kind of contribution do I want to make?
What di erence do I want to make to others with what I am
doing?
What do I want to stand for during this? What do my e orts mean
to me?
Toolkit: Using meditation for stress

Meditation is not a belief system or a new-age fad. It is a technique
that, as science is discovering, has a powerful e ect on the brain and on
our quality of life. Scientists continue to reveal more details of the
process, but what is known is that it changes the structure and function
of the brain in ways that help us to reduce stress and improve our
ability to regulate emotion.
When we are under stress, those tend to be the periods when we
have even less time to rest. Yoga nidra is a meditation technique that
promotes deep rest and relaxation. It is a simple technique which is
o en carried out using guided meditation audio that leads you through
perception exercises (e.g. focusing on the breath and areas of the
body). It has been increasingly examined by researchers in recent years

and shown to reduce stress (Borchardt et al., 2012), improve sleep
(Amita et al., 2009) and increase general wellbeing. Most guided
meditations last for 30 minutes, but recent research on 11-minute
meditations have also shown that even short doses of yoga nidra can
help with stress for those who are not able to meditate for longer
periods (Moszeik et al., 2020).
So when demands are high and time is short, using short breaks to
make use of yoga nidra would be a be er option than 10 minutes of
scrolling on social media.
Meditation is not a cure-all. Just like exercise, it is another potentially
powerful tool in the box. There are lots of di erent types of meditation
but here are some of the practices that have been scrutinized by the
research:
Mindfulness meditation. This is most widely promoted and is
taught as a part of several psychological therapeutic approaches. It
teaches the mental skill of staying alert to the present moment
and observing sensations without judgement and without ge ing
caught up in them. It is a great tool for using in the moment to
help us deal with stress and emotions we are experiencing. It
builds your ability to pull your mind back from thoughts of the past
or future and to observe experiences as separate from the
judgements and meaning that we a ach to them.
Meditations that use pictures or mantras (a word or phrase that
has meaning or signiﬁcance for you) or objects to help you focus
your a ention.
Guided meditations that help us to cultivate compassion and
kindness.
Being mindful does not mean you have to surround yourself with
candles and meditate all day. Being mindful is about the practice of
paying a ention to the present moment and observing sensations as
they come and go, without ge ing caught up in those sensations or
struggling against them. It means staying open and curious to

experience without judgement and without rushing in to a ach
meaning to them. Meditation allows us to practise mindfulness formally.
As we learn to drive through driving lessons until the practice becomes
instinctive, so the same is true of learning to practise mindfulness
through meditation.
So whether you already meditate and you want to bring those skills
into your day-to-day activity, or you struggle with meditation but want
to have a go at being more mindful, here are a few ways you can put
mindfulness into action:

Mindful walking
Start by noticing the sensation of the soles of your feet. How it
feels when they make contact with the ground. The movement of
the foot as it li s o the ground and moves forward. How much
time it spends in contact with the ground.
Notice the movements of your arms as you move. Not trying to
change that, just noticing.
Expand your awareness to notice the whole body and how it feels
to be propelling yourself forward. Notice which parts of your body
need to move to aid this process and which parts remain still to
accommodate that process.
Expand the a ention further to focus on the sounds around you.
Try to acknowledge the sounds that you might normally not
notice, each time observing from a non-judgemental stance.
Each time that your mind wanders and starts telling a new story,
gently bring your a ention back to your experience of walking in
this moment.
Notice everything you can see as you walk. The colours, lines,
textures and the movement of your visual perception as you pass.
As you breathe, focus your a ention on the temperature of the air
and any scent or lack of.

Mindful showering
For many of us, the morning shower is the time our mind gets to work
planning the day, worrying about everything we have to do or dreading
the moment we must leave the hot water and start our day. But in
those few minutes, this can be a great opportunity for practising
mindfulness. There is a lot of sensory information that feels unusual
compared to the rest of the day, and so some people ﬁnd it easier to
anchor themselves in the present while in the shower.
Focus your a ention on the sensation of the water hi ing the
body. Where it hits you ﬁrst, and which parts of the body are not
in contact with the water.
Notice the temperature of the water.
Acknowledge any scents from soaps and shampoos.
Close your eyes and listen to the sounds.
Notice the steam and water droplets in the air or as they land on
di erent surfaces.
Notice any sensations in the body as you stand there.

Mindful teeth brushing
Bring your a ention to the taste.
Acknowledge the sensation of the toothbrush as it moves.
Notice the movement of your hand and the tightness of the grip
with which you hold the toothbrush.
Listen to the sounds of the brushing and running water.
Notice the sensations as you rinse your mouth.
Each time that your mind wanders, gently guide your a ention
back to the various sensations of this process that is happening
right now.
Try to notice this activity that you do every day with the same
curiosity as something that is brand new to you.

You can do the same with any daily activity, whether it’s swimming,
running, drinking co ee, folding laundry or washing up. Simply pick a
normal everyday activity and follow the prompts to engage with that
activity mindfully.
Remember, if you notice your mind keeps wandering, you are not
ge ing it wrong. Every mind is constantly wandering and making sense
of the world. Mindfulness is not ultimate, unbroken concentration. It is
the process of noticing when your mind shi s its focus and intentionally
choosing to redirect that focus back to the present moment.

Awe
In the way that meditation can help us to get some distance from our
thoughts and emotions, there is another experience that seems to have
a similar e ect. Awe is the feeling of being faced with something vast
and beyond our current understanding of things. We can experience
awe in the presence of beauty, the natural world and exceptional
ability. Those moments that force us to re-evaluate and re-think things
in order to accommodate this new experience. From coming face to
face with a powerful and charismatic leader, to gazing at the night sky
and contemplating the universe and the chances of having even been
born. Some experiences of awe come in once-in-a-lifetime experiences,
like witnessing the birth of a child. Others can be connected with more
frequently. Perhaps a walk through the woods, looking out to sea or
listening to a powerful singer.
Psychology research has neglected this area so far, but we see awe
used by people to detach from the messy details of everyday life and
to widen the focus from the small stu to the wider world and
something that feels vastly bigger. But since the birth of the ﬁeld of
positive psychology, the research is starting to acknowledge the
importance of positive emotions and not just the eradication of the
negative ones (Frederickson, 2003).

There is some relationship here between awe and gratitude but so
far any empirical evidence is lacking. In hearing people talk about their
experiences of awe, I hear people talking about feeling small, and in
doing so, being able to recognize more easily what ma ers most. It
appears to bring about gratitude and a wonder for having the chance to
be alive. And it doesn’t require you to live on a beach in Thailand or
have access to Niagara Falls. It can be felt with a focus on ideas and
imagery. Many self-help gurus and motivational speakers talk about
how the chances of being born are one in 400 trillion. This idea is hard
to even comprehend and forces us to spend time trying to
acknowledge how fortunate we must be to have this chance to live,
even for a short time. Those ideas trigger a sense of awe and the
something-bigger-than-me feeling. There is nothing like feeling small in
a vast universe to bring your stress down and feel comforted by the
new perspective. In trying to accommodate that in your mind,
everything needs a reshu e and you get a slightly fresh perspective on
whatever you feel consumed by.
So, when dealing with stress, why not explore what triggers a sense
of awe for you, whether it is time with animals or nature, watching
extraordinary performances or looking up at the stars. It helps to
document these experiences, perhaps through journalling, so that you
can understand the e ect on you and then later return to memories
even if you cannot return to the place.

Chapter summary
Changing something as simple as how you breathe will impact
on your stress levels.
Science is showing us that meditation has a signiﬁcant e ect
on the brain and how we deal with stress.
Connecting with others helps us to recover from stress. Social
isolation puts the mind and body under great stress.
Goals founded in contribution rather than competition helps
us to stay motivated and persevere under stress.
Seek out experiences of awe to shi your perspective.

CHAPTER 31

Coping when it counts
We are so bombarded with information about how stress is bad that
most interventions focus on ge ing rid of stressors and adding in more
rest and relaxation. But what does that mean for the non-negotiable
events that cause stress? How do you face the surge in stress as you
walk into a job interview or exam? How do we deal with those
moments and stay on our game? When you are faced with a highpressure situation, all the wonderful research on how to relax and destress starts to feel less helpful. You cannot rush o to engage in a deep
relaxation exercise as your exam begins, and vowing to be less
perfectionist as you enter the only job interview you’ve managed to
get in months is not going to make you any less stressed. In these
situations, what we really need are some clear tools for how to use the
stress to help us perform and even learn from that experience. We
need to know how to actively cope with the demands of those nonnegotiable high-pressure situations.
If there are times when stress works to our advantage, it is in these
high-pressure, short-term situations and so the goal is not to eliminate
that stress and stroll into the interview as relaxed as you feel at home
on the sofa. Instead, the key is to use the beneﬁts of the pressure
without le ing it overwhelm you and have a detrimental e ect on your
performance.

Mindset – your new relationship with stress

Research shows that how we think about our stress a ects how we
perform under pressure. A shi from perceiving the stress response as
a problem to viewing it as an asset that will help frees up those
individuals to spend less energy trying to squash the feelings and
instead focus on meeting whatever demands they face. As a result,
they tend to feel less worried about the stress, feel more conﬁdent and
perform be er. This mindset shi can be the subtle di erence between
‘Despite how stressful it is, try your best’ to ‘When you feel the signs of
stress channel that energy and enhanced focus to do your best.’ There
is also evidence that doing this helps us to feel less exhausted by the
stress (Strack & Esteves, 2014).
When we focus our e orts purely on reducing stress in the build-up
to a big event, whatever it may be, we are reinforcing the
misconception that stress is a problem to be solved. When you are
trying to get somewhere and stress rears its head, take it with you. Let
it help you to focus and energize and move with accuracy. You are built
to perform under pressure and that is exactly what you will do.
Reminding yourself of this changes the meaning of those signs of stress
that might otherwise be seen as ‘symptoms’ of a problem. In fact,
research shows that simply reminding someone that their performance
improves under pressure improves their actual performance by 33 per
cent (Jamieson et al., 2018).

Bad language
One way to change our mindset is in our use of language. The words we
use can powerfully determine the meaning of a situation and our
approach to it. Imagine you were a professional athlete and just before
you le the locker room to compete your coach said, ‘You’re about to
blow it.’ Not only would your stress increase but your subsequent
thoughts are likely to sound like catastrophizing thoughts that turn that
stress into something that feels like panic.

Social media is awash with daily a rmations and quotes, some of
which may happen to hit home if they reach the right person at the
right time. But what di erence can they make?
Some of them focus on what to stop doing or sweeping statements
about what to avoid in life. There is a big problem with focusing an
a rmation on what not to do. We only have the one spotlight of
a ention and when we focus it on what not to do, that leaves li le
room to focus on what we do need to do for things to go well.
Others focus on being purely positive. These can be upli ing but only
if you believe in them. Simply being told to ‘Stay positive’ or ‘You’re
doing great’ is vague at best and o ers no clear guidance on how to
move through the challenge ahead of you.
Dr Dave Alred is an elite performance coach who works with many
of the world’s top athletes, helping them to perform at their highest
level under extreme and very public pressure. When he puts together
a rmations for his athletes he makes sure those a rmations steer
away from sweeping absolutes and remain concrete and factual –
something the player believes. They clearly identify the key to the
necessary mindset and remind them that keeping to the process will
lead to improvement. When statements make it clear what needs to be
focused on, they give us direction. Alred (2016) suggests starting with a
‘how to’ statement, then vividly describing what happens when the
process is right, and thirdly conjuring up the emotional state that
matches your intention. When stress is high and threatens to disrupt
our concentration or ability to perform, we can prepare statements like
those in advance to help us match our thoughts, feelings and actions to
our intentions. The type of demands you face will change the type of
statements you need. The key is to keep them short, concrete, speciﬁc
and instructional and for them to put you in touch with the feeling of
the process that you may have practised before the event.

Reframing

We have covered reframing in other sections of this book but it is also
especially helpful here. Reframing is using the power of language or
imagery to adjust the way you perceive a situation. You are not trying
to convince yourself of anything that you don’t believe could be true.
You are simply trying to shi your frame of reference. Looking at things
from a new perspective can enable us to draw new meaning from the
experience and, in doing so, shi our emotional state. In the section on
fear we talked about reframing anxiety to excitement. In this case, we
can reframe the sensations of stress to the feeling of determination, or
threat into challenge. Changing just these single words transforms that
meaning without telling any lies about the reality of the physical
sensations we face. With the la er words, we are choosing to embrace
those feelings. With the former, we ﬁnd them aversive and push them
away.

Focus
In high-stress situations we tend to get tunnel vision. This is supposed
to happen, as it helps us to focus on the most important demands. But
if the sensations of that stress feel overwhelming there is something
that we can do to allow the body to maintain that high output while
calming the mind. Ongoing research into this suggests that choosing to
shi from that tunnel vision back to a more panoramic view calms the
mind. This does not mean moving your head to look all around you but
just allowing your gaze to widen and take in more of your surroundings.
The visual system is part of the autonomic nervous system and so
dilating your gaze in this way accesses circuits in the brain associated
with stress and levels of alertness. Huberman (2021) describes how this
is a powerful technique for ge ing more comfortable with higher levels
of activation. We don’t want the stress response to stop because we
o en need it in high-pressure situations. We just want our mind to be
more OK with it, raising our stress threshold.

Failure
When the pressure is on, it’s o en because the stakes are high. We
believe that failure has big implications. This makes sense. When failure
is interpreted as a big threat, the brain wants to focus on that threat to
be sure we avoid it. For those who tend to self-a ack a er any failure,
big or small, any signs of potential failure will likely lead to a spike in the
stress response.
We all have a limited capacity for a ention, and when we need to
perform under stressful conditions we need to take full control of that
spotlight and focus on what is going to help us face the challenge. To
overcome that fear of failure in the moment and that preoccupation
with everything that could go wrong, we need to immerse ourselves in
a narrow focus on the process, leaving no space for worrying thoughts
about potential outcomes.
This is where it can help to practise ahead of time, if it is possible
given the situation. In building a familiarity with the process and how it
feels to walk through it, you can pre-prepare those guiding statements
that will remind you of what to focus on and expect if you need that on
the day. If your process becomes a well-trodden path, you get the
chance to build trust in that process.
Depending on the challenges that we face and the realities of failure,
we can use the same skill of reframing to change our perception of
failure.
Try this: If you want to explore this subject with journalling, here
are a few prompts to help guide you.

How do you respond to your own failures?
Do you deny them and quickly move on, forge ing it ever
happened?
Do you immediately start on the self-a ack, name-calling and
blaming something in your character?

Or do you look outward and start blaming the world for making
life so hard for you? If there is something that we don’t get taught
about enough, it is how to cope with failure.
When we believe that mistakes and setbacks are linked to who we are
as a person and our self-worth, then even the smallest of failures will
trigger shame and the urge to give up, withdraw, hide away and block
out the excruciating feelings. This happens a lot for perfectionists.
There is a focus on being enough in the eyes of others and assuming
that those others demand nothing less than perfection. If I fail then I
am a failure. If I lose then I am a loser. However small and temporary
that setback may have been.
But when we respond to failure without these global a acks on our
personality and instead focus on the speciﬁcs of the moment, holding
our awareness that imperfection is an intrinsic part of our common
humanity, the emotional result is di erent. Feeling guilty about an error
in judgement or a choice made allows us to be honest with ourselves
about where we went wrong without feeling doomed to being a failure
forever. It focuses on the speciﬁc behaviour rather than a acking us as
a person.
Crucially, you still take accountability for your actions. Selfcompassion is not le ing yourself o the hook constantly. It is focusing
on the speciﬁc mistake as an isolated event so that you are free to
learn from it and shi direction back towards your values. This is the
path to continuing to improve and moving on from mistakes. Shame, on
the other hand, immobilizes and paralyses us.
Failure is always di cult and heightens our stress response. In times
of stress our negative core beliefs can become activated (Osmo et al.,
2018). We start to entertain thoughts like, ‘I am a loser, I am a complete
failure, I am worthless, I am nothing.’ Those thoughts and the shame
that accompanies them are very powerful in making us feel completely
alone and isolated. We buy into those thoughts as facts. We think we
are the only ones and so we hide how we feel. But as it turns out,
among the 7 billion people on this earth, these sorts of core beliefs are

part of a list of just ﬁ een or twenty common negative core beliefs
that are seen across the world. Essentially this means that we are the
opposite of alone. As human beings, the need to feel worthy of love
and to have a safe group in which we belong is in us all.
When we feel shame around failure we can feel as if our acceptance
and therefore our survival is under threat. It is an all-consuming
sensation that can stop us even trying to ﬁx things because we believe
that the problem is us, rather than a speciﬁc behaviour or choice.
When we are going out into the world and taking risks, making
ourselves vulnerable to shame, we need the skills to manage that
shame and move through it. We all need a safe place to return to that
allows us to learn from failure without our worthiness as a human being
coming into question. That place has to be our own mind. When
someone we love is su ering, we show them kindness because we
know it is what they need. When we take a fall, it is time to do that for
ourselves. It is the surest way of ensuring we get back up and move
forward.
But how do we become less hostile to ourselves and become instead
the voice we need to hear?

Shame resilience
When we feel shame in response to a failure there is o en a huge
thought bias involved. We take one event, action, choice, or even a
pa ern of behaviour and we use it to make a global statement about
who we are and our worth as a person. This makes a judgement on the
whole person using only this speciﬁc information, neglecting every
other layer of your strengths, weaknesses and intentions. This is
something we wouldn’t do to someone we love. If someone you love
unconditionally made a mistake, you wouldn’t want them to write
themselves o as a person. You would want them to learn from the
experience and move forward, making choices that were more in line

with who they wanted to be. You would still want the best for them
and so you would not subject them to a barrage of verbal abuse.
Toolkit: Building shame resilience

Shame can be intense and extremely painful. Here is a list of tips for
building resilience to the shame associated with setbacks and failure:
Be vigilant about your choice of language. ‘I am …’ statements lead
into those global a acks on character and your worth as a person
that feed and re-trigger the shame.
When reﬂecting on what happened, stay very speciﬁc to the
behaviour that you considered to be a mistake. One behaviour or
set of behaviours is not the whole you.
Acknowledge that you are not alone in feeling this way. A er a
failure or setback, it is normal for most humans to become
vulnerable to feelings of shame and to focus on thoughts of selfloathing. Those thoughts are seen across the world but are not
necessarily helpful or accurate.
Acknowledge that this feeling, while painful and intense, is also
temporary. We can use self-soothing skills (see Section 3, page
109) to help us ride the wave of the emotion.
How would you speak to someone you love who was in this
scenario?
How would you show them you love them while also being honest
and enabling them to be accountable for their actions?
Talk to someone you know and trust. Concealing shame keeps it
going. Sharing it helps us to recognize the common human
experience of shame a er failure. Good friends can also help us to
stay accountable for our mistakes because we trust them to be
honest with us, while continuing to accept us throughout.
What response to this situation most ﬁts with the kind of person
you want to be? How could you move forward from now in a way

that you would be proud of and grateful for when you look back
on this time?

Chapter summary
How we think about stress e ects how we perform under
pressure.
Seeing stress as an asset that will help you enables you to
spend less energy trying to squash the feelings and instead
focus on the demands you face.
Keep performance a rmations or mantras focused on what
to do, rather than what not to do.
Adjust your focus to adjust your stress levels.
Work on your relationship to failure and building shame
resilience to help you deal with stress in high-pressure
situations.

CHAPTER 32

The problem with ‘I just want
to be happy’
In therapy when we start to shine a light on the way forward and think
about what we want, it’s not uncommon to hear ‘I just want to be
happy.’
But the idea of happiness has been hijacked over the years by an
elusive fairytale of constant pleasure and satisfaction with life. You
don’t have to look far on social media to come across a wave of posts
telling you to ‘be positive, stay happy, eliminate negativity from your
life’.
We are given the impression that happiness is the norm and anything
outside of that could be a mental health problem. We are also sold the
idea that if we can achieve material wealth, happiness will arrive and
stick around.
But humans are not built to be in a constant happy state. We are
built to respond to the challenges of survival. Emotions are a reﬂection
of our physical state, our actions, beliefs and what is going on around
us. All of those things are constantly changing. Therefore, a normal
state is one that constantly changes too. In his book The Happiness
Trap, Russ Harris explains how emotions are like the weather. They are
constantly moving and changing, sometimes predictably, sometimes
suddenly and unexpectedly. Emotions are always a part of our
experience. But, just like the weather, some moments are pleasant and
others are hard to endure. At other times, there is nothing distinct
enough for us to easily describe. When we recognize the nature of

human experience in this way, it becomes clear that anything being
sold to us with the promise of happily ever a er cannot live up to its
promise if happy means the absence of any of the less pleasant
emotions. We can live a happy and fulﬁlling life and still experience the
full range of emotions that comes along with being human. Buying into
the idea that happiness means constant positivity can leave us
believing we have failed when we feel down. We feel like we are
ge ing something wrong, or we feel afraid that we may have a mental
health problem. Thinking in that way then makes that dark cloudy day
even darker. Sometimes we are not happy because we are human and
life is di cult a lot of the time.
Things that bring us the most happiness in our lives bring much more
than happy feelings. The best example is the people in our lives. Your
family, who mean the world to you, may upset you the most when they
get things wrong. Parents feel a profound sense of meaning in their
roles and intense feelings of love and joy. But they also feel great pain
and fear and shame at times too. So happy moments are just one
ﬂower in a very large bouquet. You can’t have one without the other.
Emotions come as a whole bunch.

Why meaning matters
Some people start therapy because they feel lost in life. They can’t put
their ﬁnger on a speciﬁc problem but they know they don’t feel right.
It’s hard to get excited about anything or apply themselves to tasks
with any real energy or enthusiasm. Without a clear and speciﬁc
problem, they ﬁnd it hard to problem-solve and work out which
direction to take. It’s not so much that they are struggling to achieve
their goals. They are not sure which goals to set in the ﬁrst place, and
whether any of them feel worth it.
In many cases, this is associated with a disconnect from core values.
Life has pulled them away from what ma ers most to them. Working to
get real clarity on your values can do a number of things. It can give a

guide on the direction you want to head in, an idea of the types of
goals that will be most fulﬁlling and purposeful. It can help you to
persevere through painful points in life and, crucially, to remind yourself
that even when times are hard, you are on the right path.

What are values?
Values are not the same as goals. A goal is a concrete, ﬁnite thing that
you can work towards. Once you achieve it, that is the end point. Then
you have to look for the next goal. A goal might be passing an exam,
ticking everything o your to do list, or running a personal best.
Values are not a set of actions that can be completed. Values are a
set of ideas about how you want to live your life, the kind of person
you want to be and the principles you want to stand for.
If life was one complete journey, then a value would be the path you
choose to follow. The path never comes to an end. It is one possible
way of making your journey, and living in line with your values is the
conscious e ort you make to always stay close to that path. The path is
full of hurdles you have to jump over along the way. These are the
goals you commit to when you choose this path. Some hurdles may be
large and you’re not even sure if you can get over them. But you give it
your best shot because staying on this path is so important to you.
There are plenty of other paths with other hurdles and challenges.
But choosing to stick to this one and tackle whatever comes along gives
all those events and actions meaning and purpose. It is the intention of
choosing this path that enables you to push through barriers that you
might never have tried otherwise. So you may work hard to pass lots of
exams in your lifetime, because one of your values might be lifelong
learning and personal growth.
Values are the things you do, the a itude you do them with and why
you choose to do them. They are not who you are and who you are
not. They are not something you have or become or achieve or
complete.

Sometimes we dri away from living in line with our values. That
might be because life happens and we get pulled in di erent directions.
Or it can be because we didn’t have a clear sense of what our own
values were. As we mature and develop throughout our life, our values
may change too. We develop independence and move away from
home, we learn from the people we encounter, learn more about the
world, maybe have children, maybe don’t. The list goes on. For all of
these reasons, it is a valuable practice to engage in regular evaluation of
what ma ers most. That way, we can make conscious decisions to
redirect if we need to and ensure we stay close to that path so that life
can feel meaningful.
When we don’t have clarity on our values, we can set goals based on
what we think we should be doing, others’ expectations, or a guess that
once we achieve that goal, we will ﬁnally be enough, we can ﬁnally
relax and be happy with who we are. One major ﬂaw with that is it puts
rigid parameters around the conditions in which you can be content
and happy. It also places life satisfaction and happiness all in the future
(Clear, 2018).
I am not suggesting that you should never set yourself goals. But
when you work towards something, it helps to be clear on why you are
working towards it and to recognize that all the good in life is not
waiting at the end point of goals, but in the process we go through
along the way. Rather than hoping things are be er in the future, what
if life could be meaningful and purposeful now, by living in line with
what ma ers most to you? You still get to strive towards change and
achievement with all your strength, but you are not waiting for a
meaningful life, you already have it.

Chapter summary
We are o en sold the idea that happiness is the norm and
anything outside of that could be a mental health problem.
Sometimes we are not happy because we are human and life
is di cult.
Things that make life worthwhile bring us more than just
happy feelings. They bring us a mix of happiness, love, joy,
fear, shame and hurt at times too.
Ge ing clarity on our personal values can guide us on se ing
goals that will bring meaning and purpose.
Keeping our values front and centre also helps us to persevere
through painful points in life knowing we’re on the right path.

CHAPTER 33

Working out what matters
There are some simple exercises you can do to get some clarity on your
values as they are today. It’s worth noting that values change over time
depending on our stage in life and what we are facing. Not only do our
values change but so do our actions and their alignment to those
values. Life happens, and when we face change or struggle, we can be
pulled in a new direction away from what ma ers. So it’s helpful to
make time for a values check-in every now and then to re-evaluate. It’s
a way of checking the compass and the map at the same time. Which
way am I heading? Do I want to be going in this direction? If not, how
can I adjust my direction to head back towards what ma ers most to
me?

Figure 10: Values – circle the values that feel relevant and important to
you.

Figure 11: This chart gives a couple of examples of the distinction
between values and goals that may be in line with those values and
how that may translate into everyday actions.

VALUES

GOALS

DAY-TO-DAY
BEHAVIOURS

Lifelong learning,
curiosity, personal
growth.

Educational courses.

Reading, studying,
challenging self with
exams or
performances that
push and expand
those skills and
promote learning.

Love and compassion To remember special
for others.
dates for loved ones,
to visit relatives at
certain times.

Expressing love and
compassion in small
ways every day.
Writing down dates
of birthdays and
anniversaries. Making
time to spend with
loved ones. Helping
an elderly neighbour
across the road.

Toolkit: The values check-in

In the spare tools section at the back of the book, you’ll ﬁnd a blank
grid that you can use to reﬂect on what you value most in each area of
your life. The examples listed in these boxes are just starting points.
You do not have to follow these exact ones. Feel free to change them
for values and goals that most ﬁt for you. In each box try to reﬂect on
what values are most important to you in this area of your life. Here is a
list of prompts that can help.
What kind of person would you most like to be in this area of your
life?

What do you want to stand for?
What do you want your e orts to represent?
What contribution do you want to make?
What qualities or a itude do you want to bring to this area of your
life?
RELATIONSHIPS

HEALTH

CREATIVITY

PARENTING

SPIRITUALITY / FAITH

CONTRIBUTION

LEARNING AND
DEVELOPMENT

PLAY / LEISURE

WORK

The key part of this exercise comes a er you have listed your values in
each box. In ACT therapy we ask individuals to rate how important
each set of values are to them on a scale of 0–10.
On this scale, 10 would be of the highest importance and 0 not at all.
We then ask people to rate how closely they feel they are living in line
with those values on the same scale, 10 being highly in line with the
value and 0 being not at all. We then spend time looking at the
di erence between the rating of importance and the rating of how
closely they are living in line with it. If that di erence is large, then it
can indicate that you have been pulled away from living in line with
what ma ers most to you. For example, if you identify that looking
a er your health and looking a er your body is of the highest
importance to you at 10 out of 10, but you rate how much you are living
in line with that as just 2 out of 10 because you have been eating poorly
and stopped exercising, then that gives you a prompt to look at making
some positive changes in that area of your life.
All this does is give you an indication of areas of your life to turn
towards. It is a great way to get a bird’s-eye view of the sometimes
competing priorities in our lives. It doesn’t dictate what we should do
or how to do it. It just o ers us a map, an overview of things as they
are now. From there, we get to choose what action we take to bring
ourselves closer to the path that we want to be on.

Crucially, this exercise is not about all the problems we face and the
pleasant or painful emotions we encounter each day. It is about the
meaning we ﬁnd in both the toughest and easiest days. It does not ask
us to wait until everything is ﬁne before we start living as the kind of
person we want to be. It gets us thinking about how we can consciously
choose to live by our values, whatever is going on around us.
Once you have identiﬁed a few of the most important aspects of
your life and your values in that area, you can use this simple exercise
to check in and see how closely you’re living in line with your values at
the moment. The exercise was originally designed by a Swedish ACT
therapist named Tobias Lundgren. This is my own adaptation that I like
to use myself.
The star shape has six measures, one on each point of the star. Label
each measure with a domain of your life that is especially important to
you. On the scale of 0-10, mark a cross that represents how much you
are currently living in line with your values in this area. For example,
you may feel that you haven’t been prioritizing your health in the way
that you’d like, so you give it a 5 out of 10. But in your relationships you
might feel that you are living pre y closely in line with the kind of
partner you want to be, so you give that one a 9 out of 10.
Once you have given them all a mark, you can draw lines to join the
marks and see how your star takes shape. If the star is uneven, the
shorter points are the areas that need your a ention. You’ll ﬁnd blank
values stars that you can ﬁll in at the back of the book in the spare
tools section.

Figure 12: The values star.

It can be easy to feel confused about how much our values represent
our own wishes and how much they are dictated by the expectations of
others. This is an important issue to clarify. It is not to say that our
sense of duty or commitment to our family or community is not
important or that we should not choose it. But working out what values
are truly your own and which ones feel imposed can reveal why certain
aspects of our life might feel less fulﬁlling or disconnected.
Try this: Another way to do a more regular values check-in is to

incorporate it into journalling or some simple self-reﬂection.
Here are a few questions to help prompt that reﬂection. I like to
use these both personally and with others in therapy when
exploring values.

Questions to explore:
1. If you were to look back on this next chapter of your life and feel
proud and content with how you faced life’s challenges, how would
you be approaching daily life? What would the next chapter look
like? In your answer try to focus on your own choices, actions and
a itude, not other people or events that are out of your control.
Try to consider how you would approach life, whatever happens.
2. What do you want to stand for in your relationship with yourself,
your health and personal growth? What is important to you about
these?
3. What kind of person do you want to be for the people in your life?
How do you want to interact with them and contribute to their
lives?
4. How do you want the people in your life to feel when you are
around? What do you want to represent in your circle of friends
and family?
5. If you only get to live once, what impact do you want to have
while you are here?
6. If no one knew how you spent your time, would you still be doing
this?
7. As you move forward through this day or this week, what is one
value that you will try to bring to each choice and action?
Examples here might be ‘Today I choose to bring
enthusiasm/courage/compassion/curiosity to each experience,
choice and action. I will do this by …’

Chapter summary
There are some simple exercises you can do to get some
clarity on your values as they are today.
Values can change over time and how much we live in line
with them can change. So it helps to do a regular values
check-in.
When we use our values to guide our goal-se ing, it also
helps to create our day-to-day purpose.
The focus is not on what you want to happen for you but on
the kind of person you want to be, the contribution you want
to make and the a itude you want to face life with, no ma er
what happens.

CHAPTER 34

How to create a life with
meaning
So what happens when you work out what is important and realize you
are not living in line with those values? How do you begin to move in
that direction? When we decide it’s time for a change there can be a
tendency to come up with a huge, radical new goal. For example, let’s
say you do your values check-in and decide you need to start looking
a er your health by exercising. In the next moment, you start coming
up with new goals: maybe you’ll run a marathon or improve your
nutritional intake. But simply having goals is not going to ensure that
your life changes and stays changed. What does that is the everyday
details of your repeated behaviours that keep you moving forward in
that direction.
Your goal might be to complete a marathon. But marathon or no
marathon, the life-changing part comes from the things you put in
place to help you get out running every day, the running group you join
to keep you going, the ways in which you gradually increase the
distances you cover and the changes you make to your nutritional
intake to help. Se ing a goal can help to give you that initial push in the
right direction. But it is important to remember that the end point of
the goal, its completion, is actually a limitation. If you have reassessed
your values and you want to move in a new direction based on what
ma ers most to you in your life, then you are likely to want to continue
in that direction. Many people run a marathon and hang up their
running shoes shortly a er.

The values check-ins are useful to do on a regular basis because the
details of your values may change over time. But it also gives you the
chance to focus on the intricate details of the everyday ni y-gri y of
how you are living. We get to ask ourselves, ‘What kind of person do I
want to be today?’ and ‘What am I going to do today to step in that
direction?’ If your identity is going to be the kind of person who looks
a er their health every day, then that has potential to last long a er
the marathon has come and gone.
Working in this way is a two-pronged a ack. By spending time
thinking about and visualizing the person you intend to be and turning
those ideas into concrete, sustainable actions, you can begin to change
how meaningful those e orts will feel. Change is hard, so having a solid
anchor in your clarity about why, and a permanent sense of identity,
‘because this is who I am now’, helps you to persist when that change
inevitably meets resistance from your own mind or the people around
you. Over time, once those new ways of thinking and behaving
establish themselves, your beliefs about yourself can begin to shi too.
So you genuinely become someone who prioritizes health and ﬁtness,
not by the initial goal of running a marathon, but by persisting with a
new lifestyle. Exercise becomes something you do because you identify
with it, not because there is a goal to reach. The initial marathon idea
almost becomes irrelevant.
Overly focusing on outcome can lead us to quit more easily when we
don’t see results quickly enough or when we meet resistance and
hurdles along the way. When you ﬁrst decide to set a goal, you might
get excited about it and a spark of motivation will strike. But
motivation is like a ﬂame on a match. It will burn itself out. It’s an
unsustainable source of fuel. But if you have a routine of small actions
that are not too radical or dramatic to maintain, then your new sense of
identity will help to sustain you.

Chapter summary
When we decide it’s time for a change there can be a
tendency to come up with a huge radical new goal.
Simply having a goal is not enough to ensure your life changes
and stays changed.
Spending time thinking about and visualizing the person you
intend to be, and turning those ideas into concrete,
sustainable actions, can change how meaningful those e orts
feel.
Linking your intentions to your sense of identity allows the
new behaviours to continue way beyond the initial goal.

CHAPTER 35

Relationships
We cannot talk about a life of meaning without talking about
relationships. Our relationships are what make us human. When it
comes to living a happy life, relationships trump money, fame, social
class, genes and all the things we are told to strive for ﬁrst and
foremost. Our relationships and how happy we are in them are not
separate from our overall health. They are at the core of the equation.
Healthy relationships protect both our physical and mental health over
the course of our lives (Waldinger, 2015). This does not just mean life
partners and marriage, but all our relationships. Those with friends,
family, children and our community. This comes up in both the scientiﬁc
data on various health measures and biological indicators, but also in
the narratives of real people. Among the top ﬁve regrets of the dying is
‘I wish I had stayed in touch with my friends’ (Ware, 2012).
But for something so profoundly deﬁning about who we are and how
we live our lives, and something so powerful in its impact on how long
and how happily we live, we are all le guessing as to what we should
be doing to make our relationships healthy. Nobody hands us a manual.
We start connecting with others and learning from those experiences
from the moment we are born. We build up templates for relationships
from the very ﬁrst relationships we have, with parents, siblings,
extended family members and peers. We have to learn these lessons at
our most vulnerable age, when we cannot choose our relationships but
are wholly dependent on them for our survival.
Those pa erns of behaviour that we learn to use early in life to
manage our relationships can sometimes prove much less helpful to us

in our adult relationships.
But, given that relationships are so crucial to a long and happy life,
how can we start (even as adults) to work out how to improve them?
Insights from both individual therapy and couples therapy can help us
with this. Cognitive Analytic Therapy (CAT) is a therapy that
acknowledges the relationship pa erns that we develop early in life
and how those play out in our adult relationships. For those able to
access CAT, it can be a revealing process to map out the roles you tend
to ﬁnd yourself playing in relationships and the cycles you feel stuck in.
But for those of us who cannot access a therapy like CAT, what can
we do to be er understand our relationships and work on improving
them?
First, it is important to point out some of the myths we are led to
believe by popular culture that can leave us feeling that we are ge ing
things seriously wrong. Most of these myths stand for both intimate
relationships and others with friends and family.

Relationship myths
Love shouldn’t be hard. The idea that if someone is right for you
then the two of you dri o into the sunset and everything should
be ﬁne all of the time has no bearing on real life and leaves most
people feeling dissatisﬁed with their relationships. A long-lasting
relationship is not a gentle boat ride that dri s downstream. You
have to pick up the oars and make values-based choices and
actions about where you want to go with it. Then you have to put
the work in. Those actions have to be repeated consistently. If you
spend more time dri ing than purposefully choosing and working
on it, things can get o course.
Be as one. In a relationship or friendship, it is perfectly OK to
disagree. You don’t have to be on the same page about everything
all of the time. You are two di erent people, each with your own
sensitivities, background experiences, needs and coping

mechanisms. If you truly open up and connect with another
person, you will undoubtedly discover parts of them that you need
to tolerate and accept in order to nurture the relationship over a
lifetime.
Be together always. Whether it’s a friendship or intimate
relationship, it is OK to enjoy spending time apart. You do not have
to become two parts of the same person. You are two separate
and unique individuals and to nurture the aspects of yourself that
make you di erent does not need to threaten the relationship.
This relationship myth compounds our fears of abandonment and
prevents many people from allowing their partners or themselves
to develop and grow as individuals within a relationship. When we
feel secure in a relationship, we can feel more free to be separate
people and not feel threatened by the other aspects of our
partner’s life.
Happily ever a er. From fairytales to Hollywood movies, the
story always ends as the relationship begins, as if the journey is
only in ﬁnding the perfect person and a er that is endless
happiness. A relationship is a journey that will naturally meet with
many twists, turns and bumps in the road. The strongest of
relationships will have down days, periods of disconnection,
disagreement. There will be times when one or both partners face
failure or huge loss, or illness and pain. There will be times when
you have mixed emotions or you feel less passionate than before.
There will be times when one or both partners feel confused about
what the other person wants or needs. There will be times when
we get it wrong and cause the other person pain. If we buy into
the myth of happily ever a er, we make ourselves vulnerable to
assuming that this relationship just wasn’t meant to be and end it
without realizing that all relationships hit bumps in the road. When
they knock you over, ge ing back up and coming back together is
possible.
Relationship success means staying together at all costs.
Relationships have a potent e ect on our health and happiness,

but merely having a relationship is not enough. If relationships are
to have a positive impact on our lives, then this means working to
improve the quality of those connections and making careful,
intentional choices about them too. While we can take full
responsibility for ourselves, we cannot force change upon another.
It is OK to end a relationship that causes harm to your physical or
mental wellbeing. I have included in the resources section
information on services that provide support to anyone who feels
unsafe in a relationship.

How to get better at relationships
When we look a er ourselves we are looking a er our relationships,
and when we work on our relationships we are looking a er ourselves.
So all the tools in this book that focus on taking care of the self will
help you to be the person you want to be in your relationships.
Ge ing be er at relationships does not mean learning how to get
the other person to do or be what you want them to be. In couples
therapy, you can work on your relationship together. But you can also
work on your relationships by understanding your own individual needs
and pa erns and the cycles you tend to get stuck in. When you build a
be er understanding of yourself and practise new ways of
communicating and connecting with the people in your life (including
you), you can make real shi s in the quality of your relationships. That
understanding of who you want to be, how you want to be there for
the people in your life and how to hold boundaries and nurture yourself
within those relationships can act as a compass. So when we feel lost
and confused in the complexities of relationship ups and downs, we
don’t have to look to others for our sense of direction. We come back
to the self. We step back from the painting and we see how our current
choices ﬁt with the bigger picture we are trying to create.

Attachment
Our a achment styles are formed early in life. They do not start o as
choice. The brain is wired to a ach to a caregiver to keep us safe. It
enables every child to seek closeness with a parent, go to that parent
for safety and comfort when needed, and use that relationship to
create a secure base. When a child has that secure base, the child then
feels safe to explore the world and form new relationships using what
they have learned. But when life happens and parents are not able to
give the consistent connection and security that children need to
develop that secure a achment, then we can carry those insecure
internal processes into our adult relationships (Siegel & Hartzell, 2004).
They impact on the way we relate to others as adults because they
are the template we have formed for our concept of what to expect
from and how to behave in relationships. Having a particular
a achment style is not a life sentence that sets in stone how you are
destined to relate to others. But it can be a helpful way to understand
some of the cycles we feel stuck in as adults. Our brains are adaptable,
so understanding those pa erns and making conscious choices to
repeatedly do something di erent, eventually can become our new
norm.

Anxious attachment
An anxious a achment style may present itself as the need for
frequent reassurance that you are loved and that the other person is
not about to abandon you. Those with an anxious a achment style
may have grown up in an environment in which they did not feel safe
that their caregivers would return, or one where they did not have
access to consistent a ection or responsiveness and availability was
inconsistent.
Anxious a achments can show up in people-pleasing behaviours;
struggles in expressing personal needs or avoidance of confrontation

and conﬂict, a focus on meeting the needs of the partner to the
detriment of one’s own personal needs.
The constant focus on preventing abandonment can become a selffullﬁlling prophecy, as the relentless need for reassurance can feel
controlling to those who may have an avoidant a achment style, and
may lead to conﬂict. The anxiously a ached partner may build up
resentment towards a partner who does not consistently provide that
reassurance but may also feel unable to fully express their needs for
fear of conﬂict.
The answer in these situations is neither a constant ﬂow of
reassurance, nor dismissing the needs and hoping they go away.
Instead, the anxiously a ached partner can practise creating a sense of
safeness independently from their partner by building their sense of
self and learning to soothe themselves. The partner can help this by
providing more consistent connection without waiting for the other
person to ask for it. So these are things we can work on both
individually and as a couple.

Avoidant attachment
This a achment style can appear almost opposite to an anxious
a achment style. Closeness and intimacy can feel threatening and
unsafe, despite still having that human need for connection. Selfreliance feels safe, giving just enough of oneself to keep a relationship
but experiencing discomfort, vulnerability and fear in those
connections and struggling with urges to shut down emotionally and
avoid intimacy or confrontation.
These behaviours can o en be mistaken for a lack of love or care.
But they can be understood as something that once made good sense
for the individual. Those with avoidant style a achments may have
experienced a childhood in which parents weren’t available either
physically or emotionally to connect and respond to their needs.

Dependence may have led to rejection or caregivers may have been
unresponsive.
There is a misconception that those with an avoidant a achment
style do not want or need connection. They are just as human as
anyone else, but miss out on deep connection in the struggle to let
down the protective guards that were put up much earlier in life to
protect them. While the anxiously a ached person must work on
tolerating the vulnerability of self-reliance, the avoidantly a ached
must build up tolerance of the vulnerability involved in opening up to
close connection. A partner can help with that by developing an
understanding of why intimacy feels unsafe or uncomfortable and
working alongside them to gradually nurture closeness.

Secure attachment
When parents are able to reliably respond to their child’s emotional and
physical needs, that child is able to learn over time that what she feels
can be communicated, and responded to. She feels safe to express
needs and learns that she is able to go into the world to get those
needs met. This does not mean parenting was perfect, but it was
reliable enough to generate that secure base and was repaired when
mistakes were made so that trust continued.
The securely a ached child is not constantly happy, with every need
anticipated before a cry. They will feel safe enough to show their
distress when a parent leaves, but will rekindle that connection when
reunited. As they continue into adulthood they will enjoy closeness,
feel able to express their needs and feelings, while maintaining the
capacity for some independence.
A secure a achment is a solid foundation for managing healthy
relationships as an adult, but is not a guarantee of ideal relationship
choices or behaviours. Those with a secure a achment style navigating
a relationship with someone who has a di erent a achment style can
improve their relationship by working hard to understand and show

compassion to the partner who had a di erent experience in their early
years.

Disorganized attachment
If parents are unable to provide care and emotional support that is
reliable and consistent, or if that relationship is abusive, then these
kinds of interactions may create a disorganized a achment. As a child,
that might be seen as avoidant or resistant responses to caregivers
because the mix of experiences is confusing and disorienting. The
person they need for safety can also be frightening and dangerous.
Later on, in adulthood, this a achment style might show up as
di culties in dealing with emotion and a vulnerability towards
dissociation in response to stress, intense fear of abandonment and
di culties in relationships.
As with the other a achment styles, change is possible with support.
There may be work to do on building up the ability to manage both the
vulnerability of intimacy and connection, as well as the fears of
separation.
While the experiences we had in early life can be highly potent in
how we express ourselves in adult relationships, they do not have to be
a life sentence. Learning about ourselves and those we are closest to is
the work of relationships. Recognizing and building an understanding
around our own pa erns of relating, as well as those of the people we
may be in a relationship with, is a big step towards improving our
relationships. It increases our chances of being able to step back from
personalizing the behaviour of others and making conscious choices
that can help you both build a close and trusting connection that
enhances both of your lives.
So, how can we put this into action? What can we do to start
improving our relationships today? As with most things, there are no
quick ﬁxes. Creating anything that is long-lasting is not about one big
grand gesture that will make everything OK. It is about making those

seemingly small everyday choices conscious and intentional. It is about
reliably and consistently trying to navigate towards your values. The
way to ensure that your everyday actions are led by intention, rather
than reactive, is to step back every now and then and reﬂect on how
you want the picture to look.
Relationships researcher John Go man (Go man & Silver, 1999)
suggests that for both men and women the overriding factor that
determines how satisﬁed they feel in their relationship (by 70 per cent)
is the quality of their friendship. So actively focusing on how to develop
friendship and working on what it takes to be a be er friend is a good
idea.
When we work on building the quality of friendship, we might do
that by regularly enjoying each other’s company and working hard to
maintain mutual compassion and respect for each other, ge ing to
know each other in the ﬁnest detail, ﬁnding ways to express
appreciation and care in everyday life. The more of life we can ﬁll with
closeness and experiences that strengthen friendship, the more
protection the relationship has against the inevitable hurdles that come
in the form of disagreements, stressful life events and losses. It is much
easier to ride the waves of life’s ups and downs if we are well-practised
at pulling together and have built up deep respect and gratitude for
each other.

Connection
In this book I have talked a lot about the dangers of numbing emotions
and avoidance. Relationships, whether they are intimate or friendships
or family members, are all inherently woven with emotion. When
humans interact, we make each other feel things. A few words from a
loved one can put our head in the clouds or bring us to our knees. It
makes sense that when the emotions are heightened, we pull back and
withdraw. When we do, there is disconnection between the two
individuals. And yet, any couples therapist and the research literature

will tell you that turning towards each other is the foundation for
building a deep and trusting connection (Go man & Silver, 1999).
Disconnection from our selves, our emotions and our loved ones has
negative outcomes for relationships and our mental health (Hari, 2018).
Yet we are surrounded by things that tempt us with escape from the
vulnerable moments. We numb out with endless social media scrolling
or we throw ourselves into work and make ourselves too busy to stop.
Or we turn away from our connection in order to obsess over making
ourselves be er along the lines of what the outside world tells us will
do that. We focus on trying to look something closer to perfect, or
reach somewhere closer to wealthy. None of which is what our
connection truly needs to make it work.
So what does work? Here is what the experts say about ways in
which we can build a meaningful and long-lasting connection.
Self-awareness: Relationships are di cult because we don’t
always have access to what someone else is needing or thinking or
feeling. But we can access that in ourselves. The most powerful
place to start on improving your relationships is with you. Not in a
self-blame, self-a ack crusade. But with curiosity and compassion.
Understanding the cycles that we seem to get stuck in and what
may have made us vulnerable to that. This paves the way to
working out how to break those cycles. We cannot always
guarantee that the other person in a relationship will be inclined to
self-reﬂect in this way. But when we start to make changes to our
behaviour, it can invite the other person to respond di erently too.
This doesn’t mean changing and hoping they change too. It means
focusing on who you want to be in the relationship, how you want
to behave and what you want to bring to the connection, as well
as where your boundaries are and why.
Emotional responsiveness: The big emotions we feel when a
relationship hits trouble are not irrational. Safe emotional
connection is a top priority for our brain, whose job is to help us

survive. When we shout, scream, cry, withdraw and stay silent, we
are all asking the same thing, just in a di erent way. The questions
are ‘Are you there for me? Do I ma er enough for you to stay?
When I need you most, what are you going to do?’ The a achment
styles we discussed earlier are the di erent ways in which we
learned to ask those questions. When we sense that we have lost
our connection, our brain sets the ﬁght-or-ﬂight alarm bells ringing
and we start doing whatever we can to feel safe again. For some
that is aggression, for others it is backing o and hiding away, or
bringing down the emotional shu ers and not le ing on that you
care at all. Once we get into a cycle of a acking and pulling away,
it feels almost impossible to come back together, despite the fact
that the disconnection has caused the distress. In her book Hold
Me Tight, Sue Johnson, professor of clinical psychology and expert
on Emotionally Focused Couple Therapy, suggests that if we don’t
reconnect, we continue feeling isolated and distanced. The only
way back is to move emotionally close and reassure the other. She
points out that while one partner might blame or a ack in a frantic
a empt to seek an emotional response, the other person is likely
to receive the message that they are failing and freeze or retreat
further away. To remedy this, we can practise tuning into our
partner’s bids for connection and a achment needs. This is easier
said than done when overwhelmed with emotion, so it inevitably
involves also working on self-soothing and managing our own
distress too. Secondly, it includes responding to those a achment
cues with sensitivity, kindness and compassion, le ing the other
person know that they ma er to you. It is crucial that while we do
this, we remain engaged, close and a entive rather than pulling
away (Johnson, 2008).
Respectful complaining: Most people have an idea of what type
of feedback helps them to take a message on board and learn, and
what type of feedback puts them in a shame spiral. When we play
the blame game, nobody wins. Building a healthy relationship is

not about le ing go of your own needs to please another, but it
does demand that we use the compassion and care that we would
want to receive when we tackle frustrations and problems.
Healthy relationships are not free of conﬂict. They require work
on carefully repairing ruptures in the connection. Whatever the
details of each particular conﬂict, each individual continues to have
the same basic need for feeling love and belonging, a sense of
acceptance for who they are as separate from mistakes or
unhelpful behaviour pa erns. One of the fundamental aspects of
therapy that creates a solid foundation for the ability to selfreﬂect and work on change is the creation of a relationship in
which there is acceptance, non-judgement and unconditional
positive regard. When we sense that we are under a ack or being
abandoned, when we feel shamed or unappreciated, we are not in
a position to think clearly about what would be the best way
forward. We are in survival mode. When tackling a di cult
conversation, careful thought and preparation in how you will
approach the conversation is more likely to go smoothly than
allowing frustration to lead the way with a stream of criticism and
contempt. Focusing use of language on concrete behaviours rather
than global a acks on personality helps to keep everyone cool.
Staying clear on exactly what it is you feel and need helps to keep
the guessing games out of it, while maintaining the appreciation
and respect that you would want to be treated with if the roles
were reversed is a good place to start. Of course, none of this is
easy, especially when emotions are high, so it demands that we
keep returning to our own personal values around the kind of
partner we want to be.
Repairs: When it comes to repairing, our priority is reconnection.
This inevitably involves acknowledgement of our role in what
happened, compromise and adjustments from both individuals.
Reconnection also demands the ingredients that created the
connection in the ﬁrst place: acceptance, compassion, love and

gratitude for each other. Accessing that is almost impossible when
emotions are high, so it doesn’t have to happen immediately. It is
OK to minimize damage by taking a short time to step back and
calm down, before re-approaching in a more skilful way. All of this
sounds idealistic, and real life doesn’t always happen that way. Old
habits are pre y hard to crack. But there is no use in being a
relationship perfectionist. Sometimes we will get it wrong. The key
is in persistence and the commitment to take a step back, reevaluate and do our best to repair when things go wrong. Anything
repeated enough times will become second nature.
Turning towards gratitude: In previous chapters I have talked
about the value of redirecting the focus of a ention towards
gratitude. In the hustle and bustle of daily life, it is easy to slip into
a pa ern of paying most a ention to a partner when we need
them to step up and change something, or when they are
frustrating the hell out of us. Making a conscious decision to focus
on the things we admire and appreciate about them is a relatively
simple task that can shi not only your emotional state but how
you then choose to behave towards them.
Shared meaning and values: If we choose to spend our life with
another person, then our values check-in, our stepping back to see
our bigger picture, cannot be ours alone. Finding where our
personal values ﬁt together and overlap with our partner’s and
having respect for where they di er is key for a relationship that
can withstand life’s challenges. This might start with the
relationship, how you both want to care and be cared for,
communicate and be communicated to, support and be supported.
It might also expand to consider both personal goals and shared
dreams for your life together. There may be aspects of your
relationship and family life that are sacred to you both, while there
will be others where one partner upholds a value because she
knows how important it is to the other. For example, going along

to family gatherings with relatives that may not be your favourite
because you know how much it means to your partner that you
are there to support him. As I described in earlier chapters, gaining
clarity on what ma ers most to you acts as a compass and a guide
when we are unsure how to move forward. When we are in a
relationship, taking time to understand what ma ers most to our
partner can help us to deepen our connection and create a
relationship within which both partners can grow and ﬂourish.
Toolkit: Ge ing clear on the kind of partner you want to be

The following journal prompts can help to explore your shared values
as a couple. You can use these to reﬂect on any of the relationships in
your life. As we can’t force change upon others, the focus is on
understanding and identifying what we can do as individuals.
Which of the a achment styles listed in this chapter resonate for
you?
How does that appear in your relationships?
How can you express compassion for the unintended
consequences of those past experiences, while also taking
responsibility for your future?
What aspects of your partner and the relationship do you feel
appreciative and grateful for?
What kind of partner do you want to be in the relationship?
What small changes could help you move in that direction?

Chapter summary
When it comes to a happy life, relationships beat money,
fame, social class and all the things we are told to put our
e ort into.
Our relationships and how happy we feel in them are not
separate from our overall health. They are at the core of the
equation.
Working on the self helps your relationships, and working on
your relationships helps the self.
A achment styles early in life can o en be reﬂected in our
adult relationships.

CHAPTER 36

When to seek help
Dear Dr Julie,
I saw your videos. I was inspired to start therapy. So far it’s going
really well and things are starting to improve for me.
Thank you.
If anyone is wondering why it’s important to talk about mental health,
here is one reason. In my ﬁrst year of o ering mental health education
online, I lost count of the number of messages I received that sounded
like the one above. In each one the words are di erent, the stories
unique. But the message is the same. And it’s not just me. There are
people talking about mental health and therapy all over the internet.
On an individual level, this is what it can do.
When your mental health ﬂuctuates, it can be even more di cult to
make decisions and take action. So seeking the help you need becomes
harder to do. And there is no set of rules that tells you when to see a
professional.
When to seek professional help with your mental health is a question
I am asked frequently. The short answer to this question is any time
you are concerned about your mental health.
There are huge barriers for many people in the world in accessing
professional mental health support. From cultural taboos and expensive
services to availability and resources, there are very real hurdles that
prevent huge numbers of people accessing services that could be

helpful to them. Overcoming each of those hurdles is a massive
challenge to be faced by society. On an individual level, if you are
fortunate enough to have the chance to access services and you feel in
any way concerned about your mental health, then taking that step can
be life-changing. Simply visiting a professional and starting the
conversation allows you to explore your options.
Something that I o en hear from individuals when they come along
to talk about the idea of therapy is that they don’t feel they deserve it.
Other people must have it worse. So they wait until breaking point
before taking that step. By that time, the hill to climb has become a
mountain. Waiting until you are on your deathbed before seeking help
is never a good strategy for maintaining your health, both physically
and mentally. The truth is there will always be someone who has it
worse. But if you have the chance to use professional help along the
way, your mental health may thank you for it and life could change
beyond your current comprehension. Believe me. I have seen it happen.
I have seen people pull themselves from the depths of despair, step
back from the cli edge and start the work of turning their life around.
It happens, and it could happen to you. Not in a day or a week. But in
many days and many weeks of commitment to your health and to the
life you want to build.
When there is no way to access professional help, we need each
other more than ever. The internet has made lots of educational
resources more available and started a global conversation about
mental health. People who once felt alone in their struggles are
beginning to understand that ﬂuctuations in mental health, just like
physical health, are a normal part of being human. Stories of recovery,
healing and growth are being told. Seeds of hope are being sown. The
message is starting to be heard that our mental health is not entirely
out of our hands. We are not at the mercy of emotional states that
strike us down. There are things we can learn, changes we can make to
take responsibility for our health. That involves learning all that you can
from whatever is available to you and working hard to try things out,
make mistakes, try again, learn a bit more and keep going.

In an ideal world, all the therapies that work would be available to
everyone who needs them, when they need them. But we don’t have
that ideal world. So if professional services are not available, take every
opportunity you can to learn and to share with people you trust.
Human connection and education can help us to make big changes in
our mental health.

Chapter summary
The best time to seek support for your mental health is any
time you become concerned about it.
If you are not sure how much help you need, a professional
can help you decide.
In an ideal world, therapeutic services would be available to
everyone. But we don’t have that ideal world.
If services are not accessible for you, take every opportunity
to learn all you can about recovery and to use the support of
trusted loved ones.

References
Section 1: On Dark Places
Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F, & Emery, G. (1979), Cognitive
Therapy of Depression, New York: Wiley.

Breznitz, S., & Hemingway, C. (2012), Maximum Brainpower:
Challenging the Brain for Health and Wisdom, New York: Ballantine
Books.
Brown, S., Martinez, M. J., & Parsons, L. M. (2004), ‘Passive music
listening spontaneously engages limbic and paralimbic systems’,
Neuroreport, 15 (13), 2033–7.

Clark, I., & Nicholls, H. (2017), Third Wave CBT Integration for
individuals and teams: Comprehend, cope and connect, London:
Routledge.
Colcombe, S., & Kramer, A. F. (2003), ‘Fitness e ects on the cognitive
function of older adults. A meta-analytic study’, Psychological
Science, 14 (2), 125–30.
Cregg, D. R., & Cheavens, J. S., ‘Gratitude Interventions: E ective Selfhelp? A Meta-analysis of the Impact on Symptoms of Depression and
Anxiety’, Journal of Happiness Studies (2020),
h ps://doi.org/10.1007/s10902-020-00236-6
DiSalvo, D. (2013), Brain Changer: How Harnessing Your Brain’s Power
to Adapt Can Change Your Life, Dallas: BenBella Books.

Feldman Barre , L. (2017), How Emotions Are Made. The Secret Life of
The Brain, London: Pan Macmillan.

Gilbert, P. (1997), Overcoming Depression: A self-help guide to using
Cognitive Behavioural Techniques, London: Robinson.

Greenberger, D., & Padesky, C. A. (2016), Mind over Mood, 2nd Edition,
New York: Guilford Press.
Inagaki, Tristen, K., & Eisenberger, Naomi I. (2012), ‘Neural Correlates of
Giving Support to a Loved One’, Psychosomatic Medicine, 74 (1), 3–7.
Jacka, F. N. (2019), Brain Changer, London: Yellow Kite.

Jacka, F. N., et al. (2017), ‘A randomized controlled trial of dietary
improvement for adults with major depression (the ‘SMILES’ trial)’,
BMC Medicine, 15 (1), 23.
Josefsson, T., Lindwall, M., & Archer, T. (2013), ‘Physical Exercise
Intervention in Depressive Disorders: Meta Analysis and Systemic
Review’, Medicine and Science in Sports, 24 (2), 259–72.
Joseph, N. T., Myers, H. F., et al. (2011), ‘Support and undermining in
interpersonal relationships are associated with symptom
improvement in a trial of antidepressant medication’, Psychiatry, 74
(3), 240–54.
Kim, W., Lim, S. K., Chung, E. J., & Woo, J. M. (2009), ‘The E ect of
Cognitive Behavior Therapy-Based Psychotherapy Applied in a Forest
Environment on Physiological Changes and Remission of Major
Depressive Disorder’, Psychiatry Investigation, 6 (4), 245–54.
McGonigal, K. (2019), The Joy of Movement, Canada: Avery.

Mura, G., Moro, M. F., Pa en, S. B., & Carta, M. G. (2014), ‘Exercise as an
Add-On Strategy for the Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder: A
Systematic Review’, CNS Spectrums, 19 (6), 496–508.
Nakahara, H., Furuya, S., et al. (2009), ‘Emotion-related changes in heart
rate and its variability during performance and perception of music’,
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1169, 359–62.
Olsen, C. M. (2011), ‘Natural Rewards, Neuroplasticity, and Non-Drug
Addictions’, Neuropharmacology, 61 (7), 1109–22.

Petruzzello, S. J., Landers, D. M., et al. (1991), ‘A meta-analysis on the
anxiety-reducing e ects of acute and chronic exercise. Outcomes
and mechanisms’, Sports Medicine, 11 (3), 143–82.
Raichlen, D. A., Foster, A. D., Seillier, A., Giu rida, A., & Gerdeman, G. L.
(2013), ‘Exercise-Induced Endocannabinoid Signaling Is Modulated by
Intensity’, European Journal of Applied Physiology, 113 (4), 869–75.
Sanchez-Villegas, A., et al. (2013), ‘Mediterranean dietary pa ern and
depression: the PREDIMED randomized trial’, BMC Medicine, 11, 208.
Schuch, F. B., Vancampfort, D., Richards, J., et al. (2016), ‘Exercise as a
treatment for depression: A Meta-Analysis Adjusting for Publication
Bias’, Journal of Psychiatric Research, 77, 24–51.
Singh, N. A., Clements, K. M., & Fiatrone, M. A. (1997), ‘A Randomized
Controlled Trial of the E ect of Exercise on Sleep’, Sleep, 20 (2), 95–
101.
Tops, M., Riese, H., et al. (2008), ‘Rejection sensitivity relates to
hypocortisolism and depressed mood state in young women’,
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 33 (5), 551–9.
Waldinger, R., & Schulz, M. S. (2010), ‘What’s Love Got to Do With It?:
Social Functioning, Perceived Health, and Daily Happiness in Married
Octogenarians’, Psychology and Aging, 25 (2), 422–31.
Wang, J., Mann, F., Lloyd-Evans, B., et al. (2018), ‘Associations between
loneliness and perceived social support and outcomes of mental
health problems: a systematic review’, BMC Psychiatry, 18, 156.
Watkins, E. R., & Roberts, H. (2020), ‘Reﬂecting on rumination:
Consequences, causes, mechanisms and treatment of rumination’,
Behaviour, Research and Therapy, 127.

Section 2: On Motivation
Barton, J., & Pre y., J. (2010), ‘What is the Best Dose of Nature and
Green Exercise for Improving Mental Health? A Multi-Study Analysis’,

Environmental Science & Technology, 44, 3947–55.
Crede, M., Tynan, M., & Harms, P. (2017), ‘Much ado about grit: A metaanalytic synthesis of the grit literature’, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 113 (3), 492–511.
Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Ma hews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007),
‘Grit: Perseverance and passion for long-term goals’, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 92 (6), 1087–1101.

Duhigg, C. (2012), The Power of Habit: Why we do what we do and how
to change, London: Random House Books.
Gilbert, P., McEwan, K., Matos, M., & Rivis, A. (2010), ‘Fears of
Compassion: Development of Three Self-Report Measures’,
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 84 (3), 239–55.
Huberman, A. (2021), Professor Andrew Huberman describes the
biological signature of short-term internal rewards on his podcast
and YouTube channel, The Huberman Lab.
Lieberman, D. Z., & Long, M. (2019), The Molecule of More, BenBella
Books: Dallas.
Linehan, M. (1993), Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment of Borderline
Personality Disorder, Guildford Press: London.
McGonigal, K. (2012), The Willpower Instinct, Avery: London.

Oaten, M., & Cheng, K. (2006), ‘Longitudinal Gains in Self-Regulation
from Regular Physical Exercise, British Journal of Health Psychology,
11, 717–33.
Peters, J., & Buchel, C. (2010), ‘Episodic Future Thinking Reduces
Reward Delay Discounting Through an Enhancement of PrefrontalMediotemporal Interactions’, Neuron, 66, 138–48.
Rensburg, J. V., Taylor, K. A., & Hodgson, T. (2009), ‘The E ects of
Acute Exercise on A entional Bias Towards Smoking-Related Stimuli
During Temporary Abstinence from Smoking’, Addiction, 104, 1910–17.

Wohl, M. J. A., Psychyl, T. A., & Benne , S. H. (2010), ‘I Forgive Myself,
Now I Can Study: How Self-forgiveness for Procrastinating Can
Reduce Future Procrastination’, Personality and Individual
Di erences, 48, 803–8.

Section 3: On Emotional Pain
Feldman Barre , L. (2017), How Emotions Are Made. The Secret Life of
The Brain, London: Pan Macmillan.
Inagaki, Tristen, K., & Eisenberger, Naomi I. (2012), ‘Neural Correlates of
Giving Support to a Loved One’, Psychosomatic Medicine, 74 (1), 3–7.
Kashdan, T. B., Feldman Barre , L., & McKnight, P. E. (2015), ‘Unpacking
Emotion Di erentiation: Transforming Unpleasant Experience By
Perceiving Distinctions in Negativity’, Current Directions In
Psychological Science, 24 (1), 10–16.
Linehan, M. (1993), Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment of Borderline
Personality Disorder, London: Guildford Press.

Starr, L. R., Hershenberg, R., Shaw, Z. A., Li, Y. I., & Santee, A. C. (2020),
‘The perils of murky emotions: Emotion di erentiation moderates the
prospective relationship between naturalistic stress exposure and
adolescent depression’, Emotion, 20 (6), 927–38.
h ps://doi.org/10.1037/emo0000630
Willcox, G. (1982), ‘The Feeling Wheel’, Transactional Analysis Journal,
12 (4), 274–6.

Section 4: On Grief
Bushman, B. J. (2002), ‘Does Venting Anger Feed or Extinguish the
Flame? Catharsis, Rumination, Distraction, Anger, and Aggressive
Responding’, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28 (6), 724–
31.
Kubler-Ross, E. (1969), On Death and Dying, New York: Collier Books.

Rando, T. A. (1993), Treatment of Complicated Mourning, USA:
Research Press.
Samuel, J. (2017), Grief Works. Stories of Life, Death and Surviving,
London: Penguin Life.
Stroebe, M. S., & Schut, H. A. (1999), ‘The Dual Process Model of Coping
with Bereavement: Rationale and Description’, Death Studies, 23 (3),
197–224.
Worden, J. W., & Winokuer, H. R. (2011), ‘A task-based approach for
counseling the bereaved’. In R. A. Neimeyer, D. L. Harris, H. R.
Winokuer & G. F. Thornton (eds.), Series in Death, Dying and

Bereavement. Grief and Bereavement in Contemporary Society:
Bridging Research and Practice, Abingdon: Routledge/Taylor &
Francis Group.

Zisook, S., & Lyons, L. (1990), ‘Bereavement and Unresolved Grief in
Psychiatric Outpatients’, Journal of Death and Dying, 20 (4), 307–22.

Section 5: On Self-doubt
Baumeister, R. F., Campbell, J. D., Krueger, J. I., & Vohs, K. D. (2003),
‘Does High Self-esteem Cause Be er Performance, Interpersonal
Success, Happiness, or Healthier Lifestyles?’, Psychological Science in
the Public Interest, 4 (1), 1–44.
Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995), ‘A cognitive model of social phobia’. In
R. R. G. Heimberg, M. Liebowitz, D. A. Hope & S. Scheier (eds.), Social
Phobia: Diagnosis, Assessment and Treatment, New York: Guilford
Press.
Cooley, Charles H. (1902), Human Nature and the Social Order, New
York: Scribner’s, 183–4 for ﬁrst use of the term ‘looking glass self’.
Gilovich, T., Savitsky, K., & Medvec, V. H. (2000), ‘The spotlight e ect in
social judgment: An egocentric bias in estimates of the salience of
one’s own actions and appearance’, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 78 (2), 211–22.

Gruenewald, T. L., Kemeny, M. E., Aziz, N., & Fahey, J. L. (2004), ‘Acute
threat to the social self: Shame, social self-esteem, and cortisol
activity’, Psychosomatic Medicine, 66, 915–24.
Harris, R. (2010), The Conﬁdence Gap: From Fear to Freedom, London:
Hache e.
Inagaki, T. K., & Eisenberger, N. I. (2012), ‘Neural Correlates of Giving
Support to a Loved One’, Psychosomatic Medicine, 74, 3–7.

Irons, C., & Beaumont, E. (2017), The Compassionate Mind Workbook,
London: Robinson.
Lewis, M., & Ramsay, D. S. (2002), ‘Cortisol response to embarrassment
and shame’, Child Development, 73 (4), 1034–45.
Luckner, R. S., & Nadler, R. S. (1991), Processing the Adventure
Experience: Theory and Practice, Dubuque: Kendall Hunt.

Ne , K. D., Hseih, Y., & Deji hirat, K. (2005), ‘Self-compassion,
achievement goals, and coping with academic failure’, Self and
Identity, 4, 263–87.
Wood, J. V., Perunovic. W. Q., & Lee, J. W. (2009), ‘Positive selfstatements: Power for some, peril for others’, Psychological Science,
20 (7), 860–66.

Section 6: On Fear
Frankl, V. E. (1984), Man’s Search for Meaning: An Introduction to
Logotherapy, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Gesser, G., Wong, P. T. P., & Reker, G. T. (1988), ‘Death a itudes across
the life span. The development and validation of the Death A itude
Proﬁle (DAP)’, Omega, 2, 113–28.

Hayes, S. C. (2005), Get Out of Your Mind and Into Your Life: The New
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy, Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.

Iverach, L., Menzies, R. G., & Menzies, R. E. (2014), ‘Death anxiety and
its role in psychopathology: Reviewing the status of a transdiagnostic
construct’, Clinical Psychology Review, 34, 580–93.
Neimeyer, R. A. (2005), ‘Grief, loss, and the quest for meaning’,
Bereavement Care, 24 (2), 27–30.

Yalom. I. D. (2008), Staring at the Sun: Being at peace with your own
mortality, London: Piatkus.

Section 7: On Stress
Abelson, J. l., Erickson, T. M., Mayer, S. E., Crocker, J., Briggs, H., LopezDuran, N. L., & Liberzon, I. (2014), ‘Brief Cognitive Intervention Can
Modulate Neuroendocrine Stress Responses to the Trier Social Stress
Test: Bu ering E ects of Compassionate Goal Orientation’,
Psychoneuroendocrinology 44, 60–70.
Alred, D. (2016), The Pressure Principle, London: Penguin.

Amita, S., Prabhakar, S., Manoj, I., Harminder, S., & Pavan, T. (2009),
‘E ect of yoga-nidra on blood glucose level in diabetic patients’,
Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology, 53 (1), 97–101.
Borchardt, A. R., Pa erson, S. M., & Seng, E. K. (2012), ‘The e ect of
meditation on cortisol: A comparison of meditation techniques to a
control group’, Ohio University: Department of Experimental Health
Psychology. Retrieved from
h p://www.irest.us/sites/default/ﬁles/Meditation%20on%20Cortisol
%2012.pdf
Crocker, J., Olivier, M., & Nuer, N. (2009), ‘Self-image Goals and
Compassionate Goals: Costs and Beneﬁts’, Self and Identity, 8, 251–
69.
Feldman Barre , L. (2017), How Emotions Are Made. The Secret Life of
The Brain, London: Pan Macmillan.

Frederickson, L. B. (2003), ‘The Value of Positive Emotions’, American
Scientist, USA: Sigma.
Huberman (2021). Talks by Professor Andrew Huberman on his podcast
The Huberman Lab can be accessed on YouTube.
Inagaki, T. K., & Eisenberger, N. I. (2012), ‘Neural Correlates of Giving
Support to a Loved One’, Psychosomatic Medicine, 74, 3–7.
Jamieson, J. P., Crum, A.J., Goyer, P., Maro a, M. E., & Akinola, M.
(2018), ‘Optimizing stress responses with reappraisal and mindset
interventions: an integrated model’, Stress, Anxiety & Coping: An
International Journal, 31, 245–61.
Kristensen, T. S., Biarritz, M., Villadsen, E., & Christensen, K. B. (2005),
‘The Copenhagen Burnout Inventory: A new tool for the assessment
of burnout’, Work & Stress, 19 (3), 192–207.
Kumari, M., Shipley, M., Sta ord, M., & Kivimaki, M. (2011), ‘Association
of diurnal pa erns in salivary cortisol with all-cause and
cardiovascular mortality: ﬁndings from the Whitehall II Study’,
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 96 (5), 1478–85.
Maslach, C., Jackson, S. E., & Leiter, M. P (1996), Maslach Burnout
Inventory (3rd ed), Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

McEwen, B. S., & Gianaros, P. J. (2010), ‘Stress- and Allostasis-induced
Brain Plasticity’, Annual Review of Medicine, 62, 431–45.
McEwen, B. S. (2000), ‘The Neurobiology of Stress: from serendipity to
clinical relevance’, Brain Research, 886, 172–89.
McGonigal, K. (2012), The Willpower Instinct, London: Avery.

Mogilner, C., Chance, Z., & Norton, M. I. (2012), ‘Giving Time Gives You
Time’, Psychological Science, 23 (10), 1233–8.
Moszeik, E. N., von Oertzen, T., & Renner, K. H., ‘E ectiveness of a
short Yoga Nidra meditation on stress, sleep, and well-being in a large
and diverse sample’, Current Psychology (2020),
h ps://doi.org/10.1007/s12144-020-01042-2

Osmo, F., Duran, V., Wenzel, A., et al. (2018), ‘The Negative Core Beliefs
Inventory (NCBI): Development and Psychometric Properties’,
Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 32 (1), 1–18.
Sapolsky, R. (2017), Behave. The Biology of Humans at Our Best and
Worst, London: Vintage.
Stellar, J. E., John-Henderson, N., Anderson, C. L., Gordon, A. M.,
McNeil, G. D., & Keltner, D. (2015), ‘Positive a ect and markers of
inﬂammation: discrete positive emotions predict lower levels of
inﬂammatory cytokines’, Emotion 15 (2), 129–33.
Strack, J., & Esteves, F. (2014), ‘Exams? Why Worry? The Relationship
Between Interpreting Anxiety as Facilitative, Stress Appraisals,
Emotional Exhaustion, and Academic Performance’, Anxiety, Stress,
and Coping: An International Journal, 1–10.

Ware, B. (2012), The Top Five Regrets of the Dying, London: Hay House.

Section 8: On a Meaningful Life
Clear, J., Atomic Habits (2018), London: Random House.

Feldman Barre , L. (2017), How Emotions Are Made. The Secret Life of
The Brain, London: Pan Macmillan.
Fletcher, E. (2019), Stress Less, Accomplish More, London: William
Morrow.

Go man, J. M., & Silver, N. (1999), The Seven Principles for Making
Marriage Work, London: Orion.
Hari, J. (2018), Lost Connections, London: Bloomsbury.
Johnson, S. (2008), Hold Me Tight. London: Piatkus.

Sapolsky, R. (2017), Behave. The Biology of Humans at Our Best and
Worst, London: Vintage.

Siegel, D. J., & Hartzell, M. (2004), Parenting from the Inside Out: How
a deeper self-understanding can help you raise children who thrive,

New York: Tarcher Perigee.
Thomas, M. (2021), The Lasting Connection, London: Robinson.

Waldinger, R. (2015), What makes a good life? Lessons from the longest
study on happiness, TEDx Beacon Street.
h ps://www.ted.com/talks/robert_waldinger_what_makes_a_good_lif
e_lessons_from_the_longest_study_on_happiness/transcript?
rid=J7CiE5vP5I5t
Ware, B. (2012), The Top Five Regrets of the Dying, London: Hay House.

Diagrams
Figure 1 is an adapted variation based on an original from: Clarke, I., &
Wilson, H. (2009), Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Acute Inpatient
Mental Health Units: Working with Clients, Sta and the Milieu,
Abingdon: Routledge.
Figure 2 is an adapated variation based on an original from:
Greenberger, D., & Padesky, C. A. (2016), Mind Over Mood, 2nd
Edition, New York: Guilford Press.
Figure 3 is an adapted variation based on an original from: Clarke, I., &
Wilson, H. (2009), Cognitive Behavioural Therapy for Acute Inpatient
Mental Health Units, Sussex: Routledge.

Resources
This book is your toolkit to use for improving or enhancing your mental
health and wellbeing. If you ﬁnd a speciﬁc tool or approach especially
helpful and are interested to ﬁnd out more about that approach, see
the following list of related self-help books and organizations that o er
support.
Isabel Clarke, How to Deal with Anger: A 5-step CBT-based Plan for
Managing Anger and Frustration, London: Hodder & Stoughton,
2016.
Paul Gilbert, Overcoming Depression: A self-help guide using Cognitive
Behavioural Techniques, London: Robinson, 1997.
John Go man & Nan Silver, The Seven Principles for Making Marriage
Work, London: Orion, 1999.

Alex Korb, The Upward Spiral: Using neuroscience to reverse the course
of depression, one small change at a time, Oakland, CA: New
Harbinger, 2015.
Professor Felice Jacka, Brain Changer: How diet can save your mental
health, London: Yellow Kite, 2019.
Dr Sue Johnson, Hold Me Tight, London: Piatkus, 2008.

Helen Kennerley, Overcoming Anxiety: A Self-Help Guide Using
Cognitive Behavioural Techniques, London: Robinson, 2014.

Kristin Ne & Christopher Germer, The Mindful Self-Compassion
Workbook, New York: Guilford Press, 2018.

Joe Oliver, Jon Hill & Eric Morris, ACTivate Your Life: Using Acceptance
and Mindfulness to Build a Life that is RIch, Fulﬁlling and Fun,
London: Robinson, 2015.
Julia Samuel, Grief Works, London: Penguin Life, 2017.

Michaela Thomas, The Lasting Connection: Developing Love and
Compassion for Yourself and Your Partner, London: Robinson, 2021.

Organizations that offer support
NHS Choices (UK) – www.nhs.uk
Mind – A charity that o ers information on their website and local
support initiatives. See www.mind.org.uk
Young Minds – A charity that provides information for children, young
people and their parents. See www.youngminds.org.uk
Nightline Association – A service run by students for students through
universities. They o er a free, conﬁdential listening service and
information. See www.nightline.ac.uk
Samaritans – For anyone in crisis, this service o ers support and advice
24 hours a day, 7 days a week. See www.samaritans.org

Acknowledgements
Lots of brilliant individuals have played a part in bringing this book to
life. None more than my husband, Ma hew. Thank you for stepping up
to every single role that this wild journey has demanded. You have
been researcher, creative director, videographer, ideas man, editor,
business partner, advisor, home schooler, friend, fan, critic and
everything in between. You have believed in me relentlessly, even when
I didn’t believe in myself.
Thank you to my beautiful babies, Sienna, Luke and Leon, for your
patience. I have missed you intensely while writing. I hope being a part
of this has inspired you to reach for your dreams too. Book or no book,
you each remain my greatest achievements and ﬁll me with more pride
than any job ever could.
Thank you to my parents who went above and beyond as always to
give my children the best home from home when I needed to write.
Everything I ever achieve is because you both worked your guts o to
provide me with the opportunities that you never had. For that I am
grateful every day. Thank you to Pat and David for always being so
supportive and encouraging.
Thank you to Francesca Scambler for making the call and taking a
chance on me. Thank you to Abigail Bergstrom, my literary agent, who
inspired me from the very beginning. I am privileged to have worked
with you.
A special thank you to my manager, Zara Murdoch. You have been an
incredible guide, mentor and all-round superhero. And to Grace
Nicholson who completes the dream team and helps to make all this
possible.

Thank you to my editor, Ione Walder, for your patience and kindness
in helping me turn this text into a book I could be proud of. Thank you
to Daniel Bunyard for seeing something in my proposal and inspiring me
to work with Penguin on this. Thank you also to Ellie Hughes, Clare
Parker, Lucy Hall, Vicky Photiou, Paula Flanagan, Aggie Russell, Lee
Motley, Beth O’Ra erty, Nick Lowndes, Emma Henderson and Jane
Kirby for all the work behind the scenes at Penguin.
Thank you to Amanda Hardy and Jessica Mason for cheerleading
from the very beginning and listening without judgement when I
needed to moan about how tiring this incredible opportunity has been.
Thank you to Jackie for looking me straight in the eye and telling me
that I could do this in a moment when I needed to hear it, and for
making sure I could have it all without having to do it all.
Thank you to all my clients over the years. I have learned more from
each of you than I have taught in return and I feel privileged to have
walked alongside you on your journeys.
And thank you to every single person who hit follow on any of my
social media accounts. We have built such a kind and inspired
community. I hope this book helps you to face life armed with some
more of the tools you need.
I must give credit to the incredible minds that have worked hard to
develop evidence-based psychological therapies and whose work so
many people have beneﬁ ed from. Please accept my apologies if there
are any errors or omissions in how I have translated it.
My Instagram @DrJulie contains videos I have made on the subjects
in this book.

Spare tools
Here are some blank reproductions of the tools found throughout the
book for you to have a go at ﬁlling out yourself.

The cross-sectional formulation

Blank formulation for low mood (see Figure 5, page 48).

The cross-sectional formulation

Blank formulation for be er days (see Figure 6, page 50).

The values chart
Use these blank grids to help you reﬂect on what you value most in
each area of your life (see page 286).

Values, goals, actions
Use these blank charts to help you translate your values into goals and
everyday actions (see Figure 11, page 285).

The values star

Here are a few more blank values stars for you to ﬁll in using Figure 12
on page 289 to help you.

Index
The page references in this index correspond to the print edition from
which this ebook was created, and clicking on them will take you to the
location in the ebook where the equivalent print page would begin. To
ﬁnd a speciﬁc word or phrase from the index, please use the search
feature of your ebook reader.
acceptance 164, 179–83, 311–13
of death 135, 138, 226–8
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) 225, 228, 287–8
addiction 78, 88, 157, 197, 247
adrenaline 192, 202, 236, 240, 244–5
a rmations 168–9, 266–7
a erlife 228
alcohol 20–21, 115, 129, 175, 196
all-or-nothing thinking 26–8, 31
Alred, Dave 267
anger 133–4, 136, 156, 182–3
anhedonia 68–70
anticipation 89, 151, 197, 236
antidepressants 55
anxiety 115, 124, 154, 189–98, 254
calming tips 59, 200–203
dealing with anxious thoughts 205–21
and stress 77, 106, 233–7
things that make it worse 195–8
appreciation, expressing 308
arrogance 167

a achment 302–7, 310–11
anxious 303–4
avoidant 304–5
disorganized 306–7
secure 305–6
a ention, spotlight of 153–4, 213–15, 266–7, 269
autopilot 29, 38, 83, 107
avoidance 196–7
avoidant a achment 304–5
awe 260–62
bad days 44–51
bargaining 134
baths 58, 110
beliefs 24–5, 195, 228–9, 272
black-and-white thinking 26–8, 31
blame 310
boundaries 121, 148, 153, 302
breathing
calming techniques 200–202, 251–2
controlling 192
burnout 86, 245–6, 254
ca eine 59
calming 110–12, 200–203, 251–2
cancer 225
caring for others 120–24, 253
Carrey, Jim 34, 175
catastrophizing 209, 216, 266
change 91–6
coaching 169, 177, 218, 266
co ee 42, 53, 61, 100
Cognitive Analytic Therapy (CAT) 298
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) 56, 102

compassion 122, 218, 308
towards self 79–80, 166, 179–80, 185–6
Compassion Focused Therapy (CFT) 171, 182
conﬁdence, building 162–71
connection 308–9
cortisol 235–6
couples therapy 298, 310
crisis plans 88, 122
criticism 311–12
dealing with 151–60, 169, 173–4
self-criticism 35, 46–7, 78–80, 158, 169, 184–5, 271–2
curiosity 102
dancing 56
death 127–36
accepting 226–9
beliefs about 228–9
fear of 223–30, 228–9
see also grief
decision-making 44–5, 78, 196, 244
denial 132–3
depression 69–70, 114–15, 254
and exercise 55–6
and grief 129, 134–5
see also low mood
Dialectical Behaviour Therapy (DBT) 90–91, 110–11
diet 53, 59–61, 108, 147
disapproval, dealing with 151–60
dopamine 55, 87
drugs 20
egocentric thinking 23–4, 27, 155–6
Einstein, Albert 94
emotional reasoning 24, 27

emotions
being responsive 182, 310–11
expressing 141–2, 147
happiness 277–82
naming and describing 108–9, 114–18, 182–3
painful 99–118, 129, 133–4, 139–40
understanding 16–18
encouragement 47, 79, 169
enthusiasm 72, 87, 279, 285
escaping 120, 196, 206, 228, 235, 255
exams 24, 26, 47, 95, 219–20, 234, 264
exercise 13–14, 53, 55, 58, 73, 147, 202–3
fact checking 212–13
failure 78–80, 173–7, 269–72
fame 224
fear 132–3, 164, 170
acknowledging 192–3
dealing with 189–98
of death 223–30
feedback 160, 311
Feeling Wheel 117
ﬁght or ﬂight response 206, 235, 236, 253
focus 268–9
food 20, 59–60, 77
friendship 40, 110, 112, 297
strengthening 307–8
future 90–91
Gilbert, Paul 171
Gilovich, Thomas 153
goals 280–81
se ing 46, 91–2, 254–5, 293–4
shared 314

small and speciﬁc 87, 92
staying connected with 74
Go man, John 307
gratitude 42, 88, 261, 313
grief 127–36, 227
counselling for 144
healing and rebuilding 143–4, 146–8
mourning 138–44
stages of 132–6
unresolved 129
grit 86
grounding techniques 139
guilt 140, 156, 271
habits, developing 76, 84–5
happiness 9, 114, 254, 277–82, 297
The Happiness Trap 278
Harris, Russ 278
health, looking a er 45
health anxiety 224
heart rate 67, 77, 100
heights, fear of 189–92, 224
help, seeking 317–19
hospitals 217
identity 220–21
and goals 89–90, 92
immune system 244–5
insomnia 12, 53, 57–9, 61
Johnson, Sue 310
journalling 29, 74, 92, 95–6, 118, 180
about death 229–30
about relationships 314–15

kindness 80, 123, 217–18, 257, 285
Kubler-Ross, Elisabeth 132
labelling 211–12
language 266–7, 273
and emotions 114–18
laziness 179
Learning Zone Model 164–5
Lee, Deborah 171
light, exposure to 58
listening 122–3
loneliness 62, 254
low mood 9–19
downward spiral 14–16
formulations for 48–9
instant relief, vicious cycle of 20–21
masking 9–11
things that make it worse 22
see also depression

The Mask 175, 334

meaningful life 293–5
meditation 255–6
memory 100, 139, 150
mental ﬁlters 24–5, 210–11
mental health
seeking therapy 317–19
working on 4–5
metacognition 35, 94–5
mind reading 22–3, 27
mindfulness 30, 36–8, 41, 84, 105–7, 207–8
in everyday life 257–60
mindsets 13, 265–6
mistakes 157, 173–7

mood see low mood
motivation 67–70, 82–92
nurturing 72–80
mourning 138–44
music 56, 73, 110, 112, 116, 142
‘musts’ 25–6, 27
negative thoughts 35, 210
noradrenaline 87
nutrition 59–61
opposite action skill 83–4
outdoors 55, 58, 87, 262
overgeneralization 23, 27, 211
panic a acks 100, 224
parenting 245, 253, 278
and a achment 302, 305
parties 170
people-pleasing 152–4, 303
perfectionism 26, 44
perseverance 86
personalizing 209–10
phobias 189–92, 224, 226
phones 86, 198
Pisa, Leaning Tower of 189–92, 210
planning 88–9
prejudice 167
problem solving 94–5
procrastination 68–70
progress, acknowledging 75
reassurance, seeking 197
reﬂecting 95–6
reframing 219–20, 268, 270

rejection 115
relationships 62–4, 253, 297–315
conﬂict 311–12
disagreements 299
ending 301
healthy 298, 308–15
myths 299–301
repairing 312–13
see also friendship
relaxation 134, 252
resentment 180
resilience 157, 175, 253, 272–3
rest, best types of 86–7
rewards 85, 87
risk-taking 174, 223–4, 226
routine 61–2, 148
rumination 39–40
running 106, 293–4
safety behaviours 198
Samuel, Julia 146
Savitsky, Kenneth 153
screen time 58, 86
secure a achment 305–6
self-acceptance 179–86
self-awareness 17, 148, 180, 309–10
self-control 76–8
self-criticism 35, 46–7, 78–80, 158, 169, 184–5, 271–2
self-doubt 1, 151–60, 173–82
self-esteem 166–7
self-soothing 109–12, 139, 274, 304
sensitization 197
sexual problems 247
shame 78–9, 156–9, 174, 311

resilience against 272–3
shock 132
‘shoulds’ 25–6, 27
showering 259
sleep 11–12, 57–9, 61, 78, 108, 247
smells, calming 111–12
social isolation 63, 253
social media 20, 25, 173–4, 210, 277
solutions, focusing on 50–51
spotlight e ect 153–4, 213–15, 266–7, 269
square breathing 201–2
stress
anticipatory 236
and anxiety 233–7
chronic 245–6
importance of 239–42
managing 106, 251–62, 264–74
negative impact 244–9
reducing 239–42
suicide 129
supporting others 120–24
Sydney Harbour Bridge 213–15
symptoms, physical 100
talking 141–2
tea 112
television 20, 61
temptation, resisting 76–7
therapy, when to seek 317–19
thought biases 21–34, 39, 208–13, 272
thoughts
anxious 205–21
distancing from 207–8
negative 13–14, 102

reframing 219–20
threat response 110, 156
tunnel vision 268–9
values 177, 220–21, 246, 255, 279–82
clarifying and adjusting 284–91, 294
and a meaningful life 293–5
shared 313–14
vocabulary 114–18
vulnerability 165, 306–7
walking, mindful 258
willpower 76–8
Worden, William 138
worry lists 58–9
Yalom, Irvin 224
yoga 56
nidra 256
YouTube 2, 41

THIS IS JUST THE BEGINNING
Find us online and join the conversation
Follow us on Twi er twi er.com/penguinukbooks
Like us on Facebook facebook.com/penguinbooks
Share the love on Instagram instagram.com/penguinukbooks
Watch our authors on YouTube youtube.com/penguinbooks
Pin Penguin books to your Pinterest pinterest.com/penguinukbooks
Listen to audiobook clips at soundcloud.com/penguin-books
Find out more about the author and discover
your next read at penguin.co.uk

PENGUIN BOOKS
UK | USA | Canada | Ireland | Australia
New Zealand | India | South Africa
Penguin Books is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies whose addresses can
be found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com.

First published by Michael Joseph in 2022
Copyright © Dr Julie Smith, 2022
The moral right of the author has been asserted
Figure 1 is adapted from the following work: Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Acute Inpatient
Mental Health Units: Working with Clients, Sta and the Milieu, Isabel Clarke and Hannah
Wilson, eds., © 2009 Routledge. Reproduced by permission of Taylor & Francis Group.
Every e ort has been made to trace copyright holders and to obtain their permission for the
use of copyright material. The publisher apologizes for any errors or omissions and would be
grateful if notiﬁed of any corrections that should be incorporated in future reprints or editions
of this book.
ISBN: 978-0-241-52973-7
This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced, transferred, distributed,
leased, licensed or publicly performed or used in any way except as speciﬁcally permi ed in
writing by the publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permi ed by applicable copyright law. Any unauthorized distribution or
use of this text may be a direct infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

Why Has Nobody Told Me This Before?

